The Project Gutenberg eBook of Popular Tales
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Popular Tales

Author: Charles Perrault

Editor: Andrew Lang

Release date: October 13, 2010 [eBook #33931]

Language: English, French

Credits: Produced by Fritz Ohrenschall, Carol Brown, Sania Ali Mirza
        and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POPULAR TALES ***




Produced by Fritz Ohrenschall, Carol Brown, Sania Ali Mirza
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net










  POPULAR TALES

  _This is a volume in the Arno Press collection_


  INTERNATIONAL FOLKLORE


  _Advisory Editor_
  Richard M. Dorson


  _Editorial Board_
  Issachar Ben Ami
  Vilmos Voigt


  _See last pages of this volume
  for a complete list of titles_




  POPULAR TALES

  [Charles Perrault]

  Edited by
  Andrew Lang

  [Illustration: New York Times Company logo]

  ARNO PRESS

  A New York Times Company

  Editorial Supervision: LUCILLE MAIORCA

  Reprint Edition 1977 by Arno Press Inc.

  Reprinted from a copy in
  The Princeton University Library

  INTERNATIONAL FOLKLORE
  ISBN for complete set: 0-405-10077-9
  See last pages of this volume for titles.

  Manufactured in the United States of America


  Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

  Perrault, Charles, 1628-1703.
    Popular tales.

    (International folklore)
    Translation of selected tales from Contes.
    Reprint of the 1888 ed. published by the Clarendon Press, Oxford.

    I. Lang, Andrew, 1844-1912. II. Title. III. Series.

  PQ1877.A25 1977 398.2 77-70607
  ISBN 0-405-10118-X




  PERRAULT'S POPULAR TALES

  _LANG_


  London

  HENRY FROWDE

  [Illustration: Oxford Logo]

  OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE

  AMEN CORNER, E.C.




  PERRAULT'S

  POPULAR TALES

  EDITED

  _FROM THE ORIGINAL EDITIONS, WITH
  INTRODUCTION, &c._

  BY

  ANDREW LANG, M.A.
  LATE FELLOW OF MERTON COLLEGE


  Oxford
  AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
  MDCCCLXXXVIII

  [_All rights reserved_]




  _PREFACE._


_This edition of the stories of_ Perrault _is intended partly as an
introduction to the study of Popular Tales in general. The text of the
prose has been collated by_ M. Alfred Bauer _with that of the first
edition (Paris, 1697), a book which probably cannot be found in England.
I have to thank_ M. Bauer _for the kind and minute care he has bestowed
on his task. We have tried to restore the original text of 1697, with
its spelling, punctuation, use of capital letters, and so forth. One
might have compared the text of_ Perrault's _prose tales, as published
in a book in 1697, with their original form in_ Moetjens's _Recueil or
Magazine. Unluckily the British Museum only possesses the earlier
volumes of the Recueil, in which the less important stories, those in
verse, were first published. The Text of the tales in Verse has been
collated, by myself and_ Mrs. Ogilby, _with that of the Recueil. The
Paris editions of 1694 and 1695 I have never seen. In his 'Contes en
Prose de Charles Perrault'_ (Jouaust, _Paris_, 1876), M. Paul Lacroix
_published the more important readings in which the Recueil differed
from the ultimate text. The changes shew good taste on the part of_
Perrault: _one or two tedious gallantries, out of keeping with the
stories, were removed by him._

_Two of the most useful books that have been read by me in preparing
this edition are_ M. André Lefèvre's _edition of the Contes, with his
bibliographical and other notes, and the 'Contes de Ma Mère L'Oye avant
Charles Perrault,' by the late_ M. Charles Deulin. _I have also read, I
think, most of the modern editions of the Contes which offer any fresh
criticism or information, and acknowledgments will be found in the
proper place._

_The Introduction contains a brief sketch of_ Perrault, _and of the
circumstances in which his tales were composed and published. Each prose
story has also been made the subject of a special comparative research;
its wanderings and changes of form have been observed, and it is hoped
that this part of the work may be serviceable to students of Folklore
and Mythology._

_In this little book, as in all researches into tradition, I have
received much aid from the writings and from the kind suggestions of_ M.
Henri Gaidoz, _and from the knowledge and experience of_ Mr. Alfred
Nutt. _It is almost superfluous to add that without the industry of such
students as_ Herr Reinhold Köhler, M. Paul Sébillot, Mr. Ralston, M.
Cosquin, _and very many others, these studies of story could never have
been produced_.

          A. L.




  _INTRODUCTION._

  CHARLES PERRAULT.


In Eisen's portrait of Charles Perrault, the medallion which holds the
good-natured face under the large _perruque_ is being wreathed with
flowers by children. Though they do not, for the most part, know the
name of their benefactor, it is children who keep green the memory of
Perrault, of the author of _Puss in Boots_ and _Bluebeard_. He flies for
ever _vivu' per ora virum_, borne on the wings of the fabulous Goose,
_notre Mère L'Oye_. He looked, no doubt, for no such immortality, and,
if he ever thought of posthumous fame, relied on his elaborate
_Parallèle des Anciens et des Modernes_ (4 vols. Paris, 1688-96). But
fate decided differently, and he who kept open the Tuileries gardens in
the interests of children for ever, owes the best of his renown to a
book in the composition of which he was aided by a child.

Though a man of unimpeached respectability of conduct, Charles Perrault
was a born Irregular. He was a truant from school, a deserter of the
Bar, an architect without professional training, a man of letters by
inclination, a rebel against the tyranny of the classics, and immortal
by a kind of accident.

He did many things well, above all the things that he had not been
taught to do, and he did best of all the thing which nobody expected him
to have done. A vivid, genial and indomitable character and humour made
him one of the best-liked men of his age, and better remembered than
people with far higher contemporary reputation than his own.

Charles Perrault, as he tells us in his _Mémoires_ (1769, Patte, Paris;
1 vol. in 12), was born at Paris, on January 12, 1628. At the age of
nine he was sent to the Collége de Beauvais, and was aided in his
studies by his father, at home. He was always at the head of his form,
after leaving the Sixth (the lowest) which he entered before he had
quite learned to read. He was not a prodigy of precocious instruction,
happily for himself. He preferred exercises in verse, and excelled in
these, though the gods had not made him poetical. In the class of
Philosophy he was deeply interested, wrangling with his teacher, and
maintaining, characteristically, that his arguments were better than the
stock themes, 'because they were new.' Thus the rebel against the
Ancients raised his banner at school, where one recruit flocked to it, a
boy called Beaurin. Young Perrault and his friend took a formal farewell
of their master, and solemnly seceded to the garden of the Luxembourg,
where they contrived a plan of study for themselves. For three or four
years they read together as chance or taste directed: this course had
not in it the making of a scholar.

Perrault's first literary effort was a burlesque of the Sixth book of
the Æneid, a thing rather too sacred for parody in Scarron's manner. His
brother the doctor took a hand in this labour, and Perrault says 'the
MS. is on the shelf where there are no books but those written by
members of the Family.' The funniest thing was held to be the couplet on
the charioteer Tydacus, in the shades,

  Qui, tenant l'ombre d'une brosse,
  Nettoyait l'ombre d'un carrosse.

Perrault, as a young man, was moderately interested in the fashionable
controversy about Grace, _pouvoir prochain et pouvoir éloigné_, and the
jargon of the quarrel between Port Royal and the Jesuits. His brother, a
doctor of the Sorbonne, explained the question, 'and we saw there was
nothing in it to justify the noise it made.' He persuaded himself,
however, that this little conference was the occasion of the _Lettres
Provinciales_. The new Editor will doubtless deal with this pretension
when he comes to publish Pascal's Life in the series of _Grands
Ecrivains de la France_. Unlike Perrault, Pascal thought 'que le sujet
des disputes de Sorbonne étoit bien important et d'une extrême
conséquence pour la religion.'

The first of the Provincial Letters is dated January 23, 1656. Charles
Perrault was now twenty-eight. In 1651 he had taken his _licences_ at
Orleans, where degrees were granted with scandalous readiness. Perrault
and his friends wakened the learned doctors in the night, returned
ridiculous answers to their questions, chinked their money in their
bags,--and passed. The same month they were all admitted to the Bar. His
legal reading was speculative, and he proposed the idea of codifying the
various customs; but the task waited for Napoleon. Wearying of the Bar
he accepted a place under his brother, Receiver-General of Paris. In
this occupation he remained from 1654 to 1664. He had plenty of leisure
for study, his brother had bought an excellent library, and Perrault
speaks of 'le plaisir que j'eus de me voir au milieu de tant de bons
livres.' He made verses, which were handed about and attributed to
Quinault. That poet, getting a copy from Perrault, permitted a young
lady whom he was courting to think they were his own. Perrault claimed
them, and 'M. Quinault se trouvait un peu embarrassé.' However, when
Quinault said that a lady was in the case, the plagiary was forgiven.
Perrault afterwards wrote a defence of his _Alceste_. A trifling piece
which Perrault composed on this little affair pleased Fouquet, who had
it copied on vellum, with miniatures and gilt capitals.

In 1657 Perrault directed the construction of a house for his brother.
The skill and taste he shewed induced Colbert to make him his subaltern
in the superintendence of the Royal buildings, in 1663. A vision of a
completed Louvre, and of 'obelisks, pyramids, triumphal arches, and
mausoleums,' floated before the mind of Colbert. Then there would be
_fêtes_ and masquerades to describe, and as Chapelain recommended
Perrault, who was already the author of some loyal odes, (such as the
wise write about Jubilee times,) he finally received an elegant
appointment, with 500, later 1000 _livres_ a year. This he enjoyed till
1683. A little Academy of Medals and Inscriptions grew into existence:
Perrault edited panegyrics on the king, and made designs for Gobelin
tapestries.

Perrault's next feat was the suggestion of the peristyle of the Louvre,
introduced into the design of his brother Claude, the architect. After
the Chevalier Bernini had been summoned from Rome to finish the Louvre,
and had been treated with sumptuous hospitality, a variety of disputes
and difficulties arose, and, by merit or favour, the plan of Perrault's
brother, Claude, by profession a physician, was chosen and executed.
People said 'que l'architecture devoit être bien malade, puisqu'on la
mettait entre les mains des médecins.'

'M. Colbert asked me for news of the Academy, supposing that I was a
member. I told him that I could not satisfy him, as I had not the honour
of belonging to that company. He seemed surprised, and said I ought to
be admitted. "'Tis a set of men for whom the king has a great regard,
and as business prevents me from often attending their councils, I
should be glad to hear from you what passes. You should stand at the
next vacancy."' So writes Perrault, and he did become a candidate for
Immortality. But a lady had begged the next place for an Abbé, and next
time, a doctor had secured it for a _curé_. Finally, the Academy elected
Perrault, he says, without any canvass on his part. Perrault introduced
election for the Academy by ballot, and he himself invented and provided
a little balloting machine, which he does not describe. One day when the
King was being publicly rubbed down after a game at tennis, an
Academician prayed that the Academy might be allowed to read addresses
to his Majesty. The King, who had probably given some courtier the side
walls and a beating, graciously permitted the Academy to add its voice
to the chorus of flattery. Perrault now disported himself among
harangues, the new Versailles fountains, grottoes, arches of triumph,
and royal devices, his brother executing his designs. They were sunny
years, and Le Roi Soleil beamed upon the house of Perrault. But a
dispute between his brother, the receiver of taxes, and Colbert caused a
coolness between Charles Perrault and the Minister. M. Perrault also
married a young lady to please himself, not to please Colbert. But,
before leaving the service of the Minister, the good Perrault had
succeeded in saving the Tuileries gardens for the people of Paris, and
for the children, when it was proposed to reserve them to the Royal use.
'I am persuaded,' he said, 'that the gardens of Kings are made so great
and spacious that all their children may walk in them.' We owe Perrault
less gratitude for aiding Lulli, who obtained the monopoly of Opera, a
privilege adverse to the interests of Molière. If Perrault thought at
all of the interests of Molière, he probably remembered that his own
brother was a physician, and that physicians were Molière's favourite
butts. 'Il ne devait pas tourner en ridicule les bons Médecins, que
l'Ecriture nous enjoint d'honorer,' says Perrault in his _Eloges des
Hommes Illustres_ (1696-1700). Molière's own influence with the king
corrected the influence of Lulli, and he obtained the right to give
musical pieces, in spite of Lulli's privilege, but he did not live long
to enjoy it[1].

Ten years afterwards Colbert became _si difficile et si chagrin_, that
Perrault withdrew quietly from his service. He had been employed in
public functions for twenty years (1663-1683), he was over fifty, and he
needed rest. Louvois excluded him on the death of Colbert from the
_petite Académie_. He devoted himself to the education of his children,
who were 'day-boarders' at the colleges, and returned at night to the
paternal house in the Faubourg St. Jacques. 'Les moeurs ne sont pas en
si grande sûreté' at a public school, Perrault thought. In 1686 he
published his 'Saint Paulin Evesque de Nole, avec une Epistre
Chrestienne sur la Penitence, et une Ode aux Nouveaux Convertis.'
(Paris, J. R. Coignard.) It is dedicated to Bossuet, in a letter, and
Perrault trusts that great poets will follow his example, and write on
sacred subjects. Happily his example was not followed, _la raillerie et
l'amour_ possessing stronger attractions for minstrels, as Perrault
complains. He throws his stone at Comedy, which Bossuet notably disliked
and condemned. But this did not prevent Perrault, seven years later,
from writing little comedies of his own. _Saint Paulin_ is prettily
illustrated with vignettes on copper after Sebastien le Clerc, vignettes
much better than those which hardly decorate _Histoires ou Contes du
Tems passé_. An angel appearing to Saint Paulin in gardens exactly like
the parterres of Versailles is particularly splendid and distinguished.
As for the poem, 'qui eut assez de succès malgré les critiques de
quelques personnes d'esprit,' the story is not badly told, for the
legend of the Bishop has a good deal of the air of a _conte_, reclaimed
for sacred purposes. The _Ode aux Nouveaux Convertis_ is not a success.
Perrault comparing Reason to Faith, says that Reason makes the glories
beheld by Faith disappear, as the Sun scatters the stars. This was an
injudicious admission. The _Saint Paulin_ may be bought for two or three
francs, while the _Histoires ou Contes_, when last sold by public
auction in the original edition (Nodier's copy, at the Hamilton Sale,
May 1884), fetched £85. It is a commercial but not inaccurate test of
merit.

Perrault's _Mémoires_ end just where they begin to be interesting. He
tells us how he read his poem _Le Siècle de Louis XIV_, to the Academy,
how angrily Boileau declared that the poem was an insult to the great
men of times past, how Huet took Perrault's side, how Boileau wrote
epigrams against him, how Racine pretended not to think him in earnest,
and how he defended himself in _Le Parallèle des Anciens et des
Modernes_. Here close the Memoirs, and the hero of the great Battle of
the Books leaves its tale untold.

The quarrel is too old and too futile to require a long history.
Perrault's remarks on Homer, the cause of the war, merely show that
Perrault was quite out of sympathy with the heroic age and with heroic
song. He avers that, if a favourable Heaven had permitted Homer to be
born under Louis XIV, Homer would have been a much better poet.

  'Cent défauts qu'on impute au siècle où tu naquis
  Ne profaneroient pas tes ouvrages exquis[2].'

Men of letters who were men of sense would have smiled and let Perrault
perorate. But men of letters are rarely men of sense, and dearly love a
brawl. M. E. de Goncourt once complained that M. Paul de St. Victor
looked at him 'like a stuffed bird,' because M. de Goncourt declared
that Providence had created antiquity to prevent pedagogues from
starving. Boileau was not less indignant with Perrault, who, by the way,
in his poem had damned Molière with faint praise, and had not praised La
Fontaine, Racine, and Boileau at all. The quarrel 'thundered in and out
the shadowy skirts' of Literature for ten years. Boileau turned and rent
the architect-physician Claude Perrault in his _Art Poétique_. But
Boileau, stimulated by Conti, who wrote on his _fauteuil_, '_tu dors,
Brutus,_' chiefly thundered in his _Réflexions Critiques_ on Longinus
(1694). 'He makes four errors, out of ignorance of Greek, and a fifth
out of ignorance of Latin,' is an example of Boileau's amenities. Why
Boileau should have written at such length and so angrily on _un livre
que personne ne lit_, he does not explain. Perrault kept his temper,
Boileau displayed his learning. Arnauld had the credit of making a
personal peace between the foes. Boileau suppressed some of his
satirical lines (Satire X. line 459), and we now read them only in the
foot-notes. Boileau's letter to Arnauld, in which he expresses his
willingness even to read _Saint Paulin_ for the sake of a peaceful life,
is not unamusing. 'Faut-il lire tout _Saint Paulin_? Vous n'avez qu'à
dire: rien ne me sera difficile' (June 1694). Meanwhile Perrault, in his
comedy _L'Oublieux_, was mocking people who think it a fine thing 'to
publish old books with a great many notes[3].' But Perrault himself was
about to win his own fame by publishing versions of old traditional
Fairy Tales.

The following essay traces the history and bibliography of these Tales.
Perrault's last years were occupied with his large illustrated book,
_Eloges des Hommes Illustres du Siècle de Louis XIV_ (2 vols. in folio.
102 portraits.) He died on May 16, 1703. His fair enemy in the bookish
battle, Madame Dacier, says '_il étoit plein de piété, de probité, de
vertu, poli, modeste, officieux, fidèle à tous les devoirs qu'exigent
les liaisons naturelles et acquises; et, dans un poste considérable
auprès d'un des plus grands ministres que la France ait eus et qui
l'honoroit de sa confiance, il ne s'est jamais servi de sa faveur pour
sa fortune particulière, et il l'a toujours employée pour ses amis_.'

Charles Perrault was a good man, a good father, a good Christian, and a
good fellow. He was astonishingly clever and versatile in little things,
honest, courteous, and witty, and an undaunted amateur. The little thing
in which he excelled most was telling fairy tales. Every generation
listens in its turn to this old family friend of all the world. No
nation owes him so much as we of England, who, south of the Scottish,
and east of the Welsh marches, have scarce any popular tales of our own
save Jack the Giant Killer, and who have given the full fairy
citizenship to Perrault's _Petit Poucet_ and _La Barbe Bleue_.

[Footnote 1: _Registre de La Grange_, p. 11.]

[Footnote 2: 'Exquis' is good.]

[Footnote 3: _L'Oublieux_ was written in 1691. It was printed from the
MS. by M. Hippolyte Lucas. _Académie des Bibliophiles_, Paris, 1868.]




  PERRAULT'S POPULAR TALES.

'Madame Coulanges, who is with me till to-morrow, was good enough to
tell us some of the stories that they amuse the ladies with at
Versailles. They call this _mitonner_, so she _mitonned_ us, and spoke
to us about a Green Island, where a Princess was brought up, as bright
as the day! The Fairies were her companions, and the Prince of Pleasure
was her lover, and they both came to the King's court, one day, in a
ball of glass. The story lasted a good hour, and I spare you much of it,
the rather as this Green Isle is in the midst of Ocean, not in the
Mediterranean, where M. de Grignan might be pleased to hear of its
discovery.'

So Madame de Sévigné writes to her daughter, on the 6th of August, 1676.

The letter proves that fairy tales or _contes_ had come to Court, and
were in fashion, twenty years before Charles Perrault published his
_Contes de Ma Mère l'Oye_, our 'Mother Goose's Tales.' The apparition of
the simple traditional stories at Versailles must have resembled the
arrival of the Goose Girl, in her shabby raiment, at the King's
Palace[4]. The stories came in their rustic weeds, they wandered out of
the cabins of the charcoal burners, out of the farmers' cottages, and,
after many adventures, reached that enchanted castle of Versailles.
There the courtiers welcomed them gladly, recognised the truant girls
and boys of the Fairy world as princes and princesses, and arrayed them
in the splendour of Cinderella's sisters, 'mon habit de velours rouge,
et ma garniture d'Angleterre; mon manteau à fleurs d'or et ma barrière
de diamans qui n'est pas des plus indifférentes.' The legends of the
country folk, which had been as simple and rude as _Peau d'Ane_ in her
scullion's disguise, shone forth like _Peau d'Ane_ herself, when she
wore her fairy garments, embroidered with the sun and moon in thread of
gold and silver. We can see, from Madame de Sévigné's letter, that the
_Märchen_ had been decked out in Court dress, in train and feathers, as
early as 1676. When the Princess of the Green Isle, and the Prince of
Pleasures alighted from their flying ball of crystal, in Madame
Coulanges' tale, every one cried, 'Cybele is descending among us!'
Cybele is remote enough from the world of fairy, and the whole story,
like the stories afterwards published by Madame d'Aulnoy, must have been
a highly decorated and scarcely recognisable variant of some old
tradition.

How did the fairy tales get presented at Court, and thence win their
way, thanks to Perrault, into the classical literature of France?
Probably they were welcomed partly in that spirit of sham simplicity,
which moved Louis XIV and his nobles and ladies to appear in Ballets as
shepherds and shepherdesses[5]. In later days the witty maidens of Saint
Cyr became aweary of sermons on _la simplicité_. They used to say, by
way of raillery, 'par simplicité je prends la meilleure place,' 'par
simplicité je vais me louer,' 'par simplicité je veux ce qu'il y a de
plus loin de moi sur une table.' This, as Madame de Maintenon remarked,
was 'laughing at serious things,' at sweet simplicity, which first
brought Fairy Tales to the OEil de Boeuf[6]. Mlle. L'Heritier in
_Bigarrures Ingénieuses_ (p. 237) expressly says, 'Les Romances modernes
tâchent d'imiter la simplicité des Romances antiques.' It is curious
that Madame de Maintenon did not find this simplicity simple enough for
her pupils at St. Cyr. On the 4th of March, 1700, when the fashion for
fairy tales was at its height, she wrote to the Comte d'Ayen on the
subject of harmless literature for _demoiselles_, and asked him to
procure something, 'mais non des contes de fées ou de _Peau d'Ane_, car
je n'en veux point[7].'

Indeed it is very probable that weariness of the long novels and pompous
plays of the age of Louis XIV made people find a real charm in the
stories of _Cendrillon_, and _La Belle au Bois Dormant_. For some
reason, however, the stories (as current in France) existed only by word
of mouth, and in oral narrative, till near the end of the century. In
1691 Charles Perrault, now withdrawn from public life, and busy fighting
the Battle of the Books with Boileau, published anonymously his earliest
attempt at story telling, unless we reckon _L'Esprit Fort_, a tale of
light and frivolous character. The new story was _La Marquise de
Salusses, ou la Patience de Griselidis, nouvelle_[8]. _Griselidis_ is
not precisely a popular tale, as Perrault openly borrowed his matter
from Boccaccio, and his manner (as far as in him lay) from La Fontaine.
He has greatly softened the brutality of the narrative as Boccaccio
tells it, and there is much beauty in his description of the young
Prince lost in the forest, after one of those Royal hunts in Rambouillet
or Marly whose echoes now scarce reach us, faint and fabulous as the
horns of Roland or of Arthur[9]. Nay, there is a certain simple poetry
and sentiment of Nature, in _Griselidis_, which comes strangely from a
man of the Town and the Court. The place where the wandering Prince
encounters first his shepherdess

  'Clair de ruisseaux et sombre de verdure
  Saisissait les esprits d'une secrete horreur;
      La simple et naive nature
    S'y faisoit voir si belle et si pure,
      Que mille fois il benit son erreur.'

So the Prince rides on his way

      'Rempli de douces reveries
  Qu'inspirent les grands bois, les eaux et les prairies.'

The sentiment is like Madame de Sévigné's love of her woods at Les
Rochers, the woods where she says goodbye to the Autumn colours, and
longs for the fairy _feuille qui chante_, and praises 'the crystal
October days.' Of all this there is nothing in Boccaccio. Perrault, of
course, does not repeat the brutalities of the Italian tyrant, in which
Boccaccio takes a kind of pleasure, while Chaucer veils them in his
kindly courtesy.

To _Griselidis_ Perrault added an amusing little essay on the vanity of
Criticism, and the varying verdicts of critics. In this Essay, Perrault
apparently shews us the source from which he directly drew his matter,
namely Boccaccio in the popular form of the chap-books called _La
Bibliothèque Bleue_. 'If I had taken out everything that every critic
found fault with,' he says, 'I had done better to leave the story in its
blue paper cover, where it has been for so many years.' Thus Perrault
borrowed from the Bibliothèque Bleue, not the Bibliothèque Bleue, as M.
Maury fancied, from Perrault[10].

In 1694 Moetjens, the bookseller at The Hague, began to publish a little
Miscellany, or Magazine, in the form of the small Elzevir collection,
called _Recueil de pièces curieuses et nouvelles, tant en prose qu'en
vers_. Perrault had already published _Les Souhaits Ridicules_, in a
Society paper, Le Mercure Galant (Nov. 1693). He now reprinted this
piece, with _Griselidis_ and _Peau d'Ane_, in Moetjens' _Recueil_[11].
These versified tales caused some discussion, and were rather severely
handled by anonymous writers in the _Recueil_. In 1694, Perrault put
forth the three, with the introductions and essay, in a small volume.
Probably each tale had appeared separately, but these treasures of the
book-hunter are lost. Another edition came out, with a new preface, in
1695[12].

This is the early bibliographical history, as far as it has been traced
by M. André Lefèvre, of the stories in verse. They received a good deal
of unfriendly criticism, and Perrault was said, in _Peau d'Ane_, to have
presented the public with his own natural covering. This witticism,
rather lacking in finish, is attributed to Boileau in an epigram
published in Moetjens' _Recueil_. Boileau was still irritated with
Perrault for his conduct in the great Battle of the Books between the
Ancients and Moderns. By a curious revenge Perrault, who had blamed
Homer for telling, in the Odyssey, old wives' fables, has found, in old
wives' fables, his own immortality. In the _Parallèle_, iii. p. 117, the
Abbé quotes Longinus, and his admiration of certain hyperboles in Homer.
The Chevalier, another speaker in the dialogue, replies, 'this sort of
Homeric hyperbole is only imitated by people who tell stories like _Peau
d'Ane_, and introduce Ogres in seven-leagued boots (_bottes à sept
lieues_).' The 'seven-leagued boots' are in the Chevalier's fancy an apt
parallel to the prodigious bounds made by the horses of Discord, in the
Iliad. Thus, even before Perrault began to write fairy tales, he and
Boileau had a very pretty quarrel about _Peau d'Ane_. Boileau happened
to remember that Zoilus of old had reviled Homer for his _contes de
Vieilles_, and thus he could conscientiously treat Perrault as a new
Zoilus. In the fifth volume of his works (Paris, 1772), in which these
amenities are republished, there is a Vignette by Van der Meer
representing Homer, very old and timid, cowering behind a shield which
Boileau, like Ajax, holds up for his protection, while Perrault, in a
sword and cocked hat, throws arrows at the blind bard of Chios. The
strange thing is that they were all in the right. The Odyssey, as
Fénelon's Achilles tells Homer in Hades, and as Perrault knew, is a mass
of popular tales, but then these are moulded by the poet's art into an
epic which Boileau could not over-praise[13].

In the edition of his stories in verse, published in 1695, Perrault
replied to the criticisms that reached him, 'I have to do,' he said,
'with people who can only be moved by Authority, and the example of the
Ancients;' meaning Boileau and the survivors of the great literary feud.
Perrault therefore adduces old instances of classical _contes_, the
_Milesian Tales_, and _Cupid and Psyche_ in Apuleius. 'The Moral of
_Cupid and Psyche_,' he says, 'I shall compare to that of _Peau d'Ane_,
when once I know what it is.' Then he declares that his Contes have
abundance of moral, which is true, but there are morals even in _Cupid
and Psyche_. He sketches, very pleasantly, the enjoyment of children in
those old wives' fables; 'on les voit dans la tristesse et dans
l'abattement tant que le héros ou l'héroïne du conte sont dans le
malheur, et s'écrier de joie quand le temps de leur bonheur arrive.'
Indeed this was and is the best apology for M. Perrault of the French
Academy, when he stooped his great perruque to listen to his little
boy's repetition of his nurse's stories, and recorded them in the
chronicles of Mother Goose.

Had Perrault only written _contes_ in verse, it is probable that he
would now be known chiefly as an imitator of La Fontaine. Happily he
went further, and printed seven stories in prose. It is by these that he
really lives, now that his architectural exploits, his sacred poems, his
Defence of the Moderns, are all forgotten save by the learned. His
Fairies have saved him from oblivion, and the countless editions and
translations of his _Contes de Ma Mère L'Oye_, have won him
immortality[14].

The tales in prose appeared in Moetjens' _Recueil_ in the following
order: In 1696, in the second part of Volume V, came _La Belle au Bois
Dormant_ (our 'Sleeping Beauty'); and in 1697 (Vol. V. part 4), came _Le
Petit Chaperon Rouge_ ('Red Riding Hood'), _La Barbe Bleue_
('Blue-beard'), _Le Maistre Chat, ou le Chat Botté_ ('Puss in Boots,' or
'The Master Cat'), _Les Fées_ ('The Fairy'), _Cendrillon, ou la petite
pantoufle de verre_ ('Cinderilla,' in the older English versions, now
'Cinderella'), _Riquet à la Houppe_ ('Riquet of the Tuft'), and _Le
Petit Poucet_ ('Hop o' My Thumb, Little Thumb').

While Moetjens was producing these in his Miscellany, there was
published in Paris, at Perrault's bookseller's (Guignard), a little
volume called _Bigarrures Ingénieuses, ou Recueil de diverses Pièces
galantes en prose et en vers_. The author was Mlle. L'Heritier de
Villaudon, a relation of Perrault's. It is to his daughter, a
Mademoiselle Perrault, that she addresses her first piece, _Marmoisan ou
l'Innocente Tromperie_. The author says she was lately in a company
where people began to praise M. Perrault's _Griselidis_, _Peau d'Ane_
and _Les Souhaits_. They spoke also of 'the excellent education which M.
Perrault gives his children, of their ingenuity, and finally of the
_Contes naifs_ which one of his young pupils has lately written with so
much charm. A few of these stories were narrated and led on to others.'
_Marmoisan_ is one of the others, and Mlle. L'Heritier says she told it,
'avec quelque broderie qui me vint sur le champ dans l'esprit.' The tale
is, indeed, all embroidery, beneath which the original stuff is
practically lost[15]. But the listener asked the narrator to offer it 'à
ce jeune Conteur, qui occupe si spirituellement les amusemens de son
enfance.'

In a later page she wonders that the Contes should have been 'handed to
us from age to age, without any one taking the trouble to write them
out.' Then she herself takes the trouble to write the story of Diamonds
and Toads, a story known in a rough way to the Kaffirs--and hopelessly
spoils it by her _broderie_, and by the introduction of a lay figure
called _Eloquentia Nativa_ (_Les Enchantemens de l'Eloquence_, ou _Les
Effets de la Douceur_). One has only to compare Mlle. L'Heritier's
literary and embroidered _Eloquentia_ with Perrault's _Les Fées_ (the
original of our _Diamonds and Toads_), to see the vast difference
between his manner, and that of contemporary _conteurs_. Perrault would
never have brought in a Fairy named _Eloquentia Nativa_. Mlle.
L'Heritier's _Eloquentia_ (1696) was in the field before Perrault's
unembroidered version, _Les Fées_, which appeared in Moetjens' _Recueil_
in 1697. The Lady writes:

  'Cent et Cent fois ma Gouvernante
    Au lieu de Fables d'animaux[16]
    M'a raconté les traits moraux
  De cette Histoire surprenante.'

Here, then, is Mlle. L'Heritier speaking of one of Perrault's children
who has written the fairy tales, 'with so much charm.' At this very time
(1696-1697), fairy tales, 'written with much charm,' in prose, and
without the author's name, were appearing in Moetjens' _Recueil_. In
1697 these prose _contes_ were collected, published, and declared to be
by P. Darmancour, Perrault's little boy, to whom the _Privilége du Roy_
is granted[17].

Critics have often declared that Perrault merely used the boy's name as
a cover for his own, because it did not become an Academician to publish
fairy tales, above all in prose. It may be noted that Perrault did not
employ his usual publisher, Coignard, but went to Barbin. There might
also have been a hope that little Perrault Darmancour, while shielding
his father, 'fit parfaitement bien sa Cour en même tems,' like _Le Petit
Poucet_. Considering how Perrault's other works are forgotten, and how
his Tales survive, and regarding his boy as partly their author, we may
even apply to him the Moral of _Le Petit Poucet_.

  'Quelquefois, cependant, c'est ce petit Marmot
  Qui fera le bonheur de toute la famille!'

The dedication, signed P. Darmancour, is addressed to Mademoiselle, and
contains very agreeable flattery of the sister of the future Regent[18].
These motives would, indeed, account for Perrault's use of his boy's
name. But it had occurred to me, before discovering the similar opinion
of M. Paul Lacroix, that P. Darmancour really was the author of the
_Contes_, or at least a _collaborateur_[19]. The naïveté, and popular
traditional manner of their telling, recognised by all critics, and the
cause of their popularity, was probably given by the little lad who, as
Mlle. L'Heritier said, a year before the tales were published, 'a mis
depuis peu les Contes sur le papier avec tant d'agrément.' The child,
according to this theory, wrote out, by way of exercise, the stories as
he heard them, not from _brodeuses_ in Society, but from his Nurse, or
from old women on his father's estates. The evidence of Madame de
Sévigné and of Mlle. L'Heritier, as well as the testimony of the
_contes_ which ladies of rank instantly took to printing, shews how the
stories were told in Society. Allegorical and other names were given to
the characters, usually nameless in _Märchen_. Historical circumstances
were introduced, and references to actual events in the past. _Esprit_
raged assiduously through the narratives. Moreover the traditional tales
were so confounded that Madame d'Aulnoy, in _Finette Cendron_, actually
mixes _Cinderella_ with _Hop o' My Thumb_[20].

Contrast with these refinements, these superfluities, and incoherences,
the brevity, directness, and simplicity of _Histoires et Contes du Tems
passé_. They have the touch of an intelligent child, writing down what
he has heard told in plain language by plain people. They exactly
correspond, in this respect, to the Hindoo folk tales collected from the
lips of Ayahs by Miss Maive Stokes, who was a child when her collection
was published.

But, if the little boy thus furnished the sketch, it is indubitable that
the elderly Academician and _beau esprit_ touched it up, here toning
down an incident too amazing for French sobriety and logic, there adding
a detail of contemporary court manners, or a hit at some foible or
vanity of men. 'Livre unique entre tous les livres,' cries M. Paul de
St. Victor, 'mêlé de la sagesse du vieillard et de la candeur de
l'enfant!' This delightful blending of age and youth (which here _can_
'live together') is probably due to the collaboration we describe.

Were it a pious thing to dissect Perrault's _Contes_, as Professors of
all nations mangle the sacred body of Homer, we might actually publish a
text in which the work of the original Darmancour and of the paternal
_Diaskeuast_ should be printed in different characters. Without carrying
mere guess-work to this absurd extent, cannot one detect the older hand
in places like this,--the Ogre's wife finds that her husband has killed
his own children by misadventure: 'Elle commenca par s'évanouir (car
c'est le premier expédient que trouvent presque toutes les femmes en
pareilles rencontres)'? One can almost see the Academician writing in
that sentence on the margin of the boy's copy. Again, at the end of _Le
Petit Poucet_, we read that he made a fortune by carrying letters from
ladies to their lovers, 'ce fut là son plus large gain. Il se trouvoit
quelques femmes qui le chargeoient de lettres pour leurs maris, mais
elles le payoient si mal, et cela alloit à si peu de chose, qu'il ne
daignoit mettre en ligne de conte ce qu'il gagnoit de ce côté-là.' That
is the Academician's jibe, and it is he who makes Petit Poucet buy
Offices 'de la nouvelle création pour sa famille.' 'You never did that
of your own wit,' as the Giant says to the Laddie in the Scotch story,
_Nicht_, _Nought_, _Nothing_. But 'Anne, ma soeur Anne, ne vois-tu rien
venir?' 'Je ne vois rien que le Soleil qui poudroye et l'herbe qui
verdoye!' or 'Tire la chevillette, le bobinette cherra,' or 'Elle alla
donc bien loin, bien loin, encore plus loin'; _there_ the child is
listening to the old and broken voice of tradition, mumbling her ancient
burden while the cradle rocks, and the spinning-wheel turns and hums.

It is to this union of old age and childhood, then, of peasant memories,
and memories of Versailles, to this kindly handling of venerable
legends, that Perrault's _Contes_ owe their perennial charm. The nursery
tale is apt to lose itself in its wanderings, like the children in the
haunted forest; Perrault supplies it with the clue that guides it home.
A little grain of French common sense ballasts these light minions of
the Moon, the elves; with a little toss of Court powder on the locks,
_pulveris exigui jactu_, he tames the wild _fée_ into the Fairy
Godmother, a grande dame de par le monde, with an agate crutch-handle on
her magic wand. 'His young Princesses, so gentle and so maidenly, have
just left the convent of Saint Cyr. The King's sons have the proud
courtesy of Dauphins of France: the Maids of Honour, the Gentlemen of
the Bed-chamber, the red-nosed Swiss guards, sleep through the slumber
of the _Belle au Bois Dormant_[21].'

They are all departed now, Dukes and Vicomtes and Princes, the Swiss
Guards have gone, that made the best end of any, the hunting horn is
still, and silent is the spinning wheel. The great golden coaches have
turned into pumpkins again, the coachman has jumped down from his box,
and hidden in his rat-hole, the Dragoon and the Hussar have clattered
off for ever, the Duchesses dance no more in the minuet, nor the fairies
on the haunted green. But in Perrault's enchanted book they are all with
us, figures out of every age, the cannibal ogre that little Zulu and
Ojibbeway children fear not unreasonably; the starving wood-cutter in
the famines Racine deplored; the Princess, so like Mademoiselle; the
Fairy Godmother you might mistake for Madame d'Epernon; the talking
animals escaped from the fables of days when man and beast were all on
one level with gods, and winds, and stars. In Perrault's fairy-land is
room for all of them, and room for children too, who wander hither out
of their own world of fancy, and half hope that the Sleeping Beauty
dwells behind the hedge of yew, or think to find the dangerous distaff
in some dismantled chamber.

The _Histoires et Contes du Tems Passé_ must clearly have been
successful, though scant trace of their success remains in the criticism
of the time[22]. We may measure it by the fleet of other books of fairy
tales which 'pursue the triumph and partake the gale.' The _Contes de
Fées_ of Mad. La Comtesse de M---- (Murat) were published by Barbin in
1698. How little the manner resembles Perrault's 'fairy-way of writing,'
how much it deserves the censure of the Abbé de Villiers, may be learned
from the opening sentence of _Le Parfait Amour_. 'Dans un de ces
agréables pais qui sont dependans de l'Empire des Fées, regnoit la
redoutable Danamo, elle estoit scavante dans son art, cruelle dans ses
actions, et glorieuse de l'honneur d'estre descendue de la célèbre
Calipso, dont les charmes eurent la gloire et le pouvoir en arrestant le
fameux Ulisse, de triompher de la prudence des vainqueurs de Troye.'

The second story, _Anguillette_, is so far natural, that it contains a
friendly Eel (as in the Mangaian legend of the Eel-lover of Ina); but
this Eel is a fairy, condemned to wear the form of a fish, for certain
days in each month. These narratives are almost unreadable, and scarcely
keep a trace of the popular tradition. The tales of Madame d'Aulnoy, on
the other hand, introduced the _White Cat_, the _Yellow Dwarf_, _Finette
Cendron_, and _Le Mouton_ to literature and the stage, where they
survive in pantomime and _féerie_. _Beauty and the Beast_ first appears,
at the immoderate length of three hundred and sixty-two pages, in _Les
Contes Marins_ (La Haye, 1740) by Madame de Villeneuve.

Literary Fairy Tales flourished all through the eighteenth century in
the endless _Cabinet de Fées_. As for Perrault's Tales, they were
republished at the Hague, in 1742, with illustrations by Fokke. In 1745,
they appeared, with Fokke's vignettes, and with an English translation.
An English version, translated by Mr. Samber, printed for J. Pote, was
advertised, Mr. Austin Dobson tells me, in the _Monthly Chronicle_,
March 1729. There have been innumerable editions, often splendidly
equipped and illustrated, down to the present date. This little book
alone, of all Charles Perrault's labours, has won 'the land of matters
unforgot.' Odysseus, Figaro, and Othello are not more certain to be
immortal than Hop o' my Thumb, Puss in Boots, and Blue Beard, the heroes
whom Charles Nodier so pleasantly called 'the Ulysses, the Figaro, and
the Othello of children.'

[Footnote 4: Grimm, _Kinder- und Hausmärchen_. No. 89.]

[Footnote 5: _Ballet des Arts, dansé par sa Majesté; le 8 Janvier,
1663._ A Paris. Par Robert Ballard. M.DC.LXIII.]

[Footnote 6: _Madame de Maintenon d'après sa Correspondance._ Geffroy,
ii. 211. Paris, 1887.]

[Footnote 7: _Madame de Maintenon d'après sa Correspondance._ Geffroy,
i. 322.]

[Footnote 8: Paris: de l'imprimerie de Jean Baptiste Coignard, imprimeur
du Roy et de l'Académie Françoise, rue Saint Jacques, la Bible d'or,
1691. The Bibliothèque Nationale and the Arsenal possess copies of this
duodecimo of 58 pages. One of the copies is inscribed _Donné par
Lautheur_ 1691. (Lefèvre. _Contes de Charles Perrault_, p. 167. Paris,
_s. a._)]

[Footnote 9: Paul de Saint Victor, _Les Contes des Fées_, in _Hommes et
Dieux_, p. 475. Paris, 1883.]

[Footnote 10: _Les Fées du Moyen Age_, p. 101. Paris, 1843.]

[Footnote 11: Recueil, 1694. _Peau d'Ane_, p. 50. _Les Souhaits
Ridicules_, p. 93. _Griselidis_, p. 233.]

[Footnote 12: Coignard Veuve. Paris.]

[Footnote 13: _Dialogues des Morts par feu Messire François de Salignac
de la Motte Fénelon_, vol. i. p. 23. Paris, 1718. 'L'autre n'est qu'un
amas de contes de vieilles.' Achilles thus anticipates Gerland's
_Altgriechische Märchen in der Odyssee_.]

[Footnote 14: Contes de Ma Mère L'Oye is the title on the frontispiece.
The term occurs in Loret, _La Muse Historique_. (Lettre V. 11 Juin,
1650.)

  'Mais le cher motif de leur joye,
  Comme un conte de la Mère Oye,
  Se trouvant fabuleux et faux,
  Ils deviendront tous bien pénauts.'
]

[Footnote 15: In her _Moralité_, Mlle. L'Heritier says,--

  'Cent fois ma nourrice ou ma mie
  M'ont fait ce beau recit le soir pres des tisons,
  Je n'y fais qu'ajouter un peu de broderie.'
]

[Footnote 16: The _Fables d'animaux_ are probably even older than
_contes_ _Diamonds and Toads_. A Mouse and a Frog, as well as the Old
Woman who survives as _La Fée_, take part in the tale as the Kaffirs
tell it in _The Story of Five Heads_, in Theal's _Kaffir Folk Lore_, pp.
48, 49. The Kaffir story slides into a form of _Beauty and the Beast_.
By some unexplained accident a story of Mlle. L'Heritier's _L'Adroite
Princesse_ slipped into editions of Perrault's _Contes_, in 1721, if not
earlier, and holds its place even now.]

[Footnote 17: _Histoires ou Contes du Tems Passé, avec des Moralités._ A
Paris. Chez Claude Barbin, sur le second peron de la Sainte-Chapelle; au
Palais. Avec Privilége de sa Majesté, 1697. In 12o. 230 pp. Bibliothèque
de M. Cousin, 9677. The frontispiece, by Clouzier, represents an old
woman spinning, and telling tales to a man, a girl, a little boy, and a
cat which, from its broad and intelligent grin, naturalists believe to
be of the Cheshire breed. On a placard is written

  CONTES
  DEMA
  MERE
  LOYE.

A copy, modified, of the engraving is printed on the cover of M. Charles
Deulin's _Les Contes de Ma Mère L'Oye avant Perrault_. (Paris, Dentu,
1879.) The design holds its own, with various slight alterations, in the
English chap-books of _Mother Goose's Tales_, even in the present
century. There is a vastly 'embroidered' reminiscence of Clouzier in the
edition edited by M. Ch. Giraud, for Perrin of Lyon, 1865.]

[Footnote 18: Mademoiselle was Elizabeth Charlotte d'Orleans, born 1676,
sister of Philippe, Duc de Chartres, later Duc d'Orleans, and Regent.
See Paul Lacroix in _Contes de Perrault_, Paris, s. d. (1826.)]

[Footnote 19: In the introduction to the Jouaust edition of 1876 M. Paul
Lacroix has probably gone too far in attributing to Perrault's son the
complete authorship of the Tales. It is true that the title of the Dutch
reprint of 1697 describes the book as 'par le fils de Monsieur
Perrault.' The Abbé de Villiers, however, in his _Entretiens sur les
Contes des Fées_ (à Paris chez Jacques Collombat, 1699), makes one of
his persons praise the stories 'que l'on attribue au fils d'un célèbre
Académicien,' for their freshness and imitation of the style of nurses.
Another speaker in the dialogue, The Parisian, replies, 'quelque estime
que j'aie pour le fils de l'Académicien, j'ai peine à croire que le père
n'ait pas mis la main à son ouvrage,' p. 109. This opinion is probably
correct. It seems that Perrault was not troubled by attacks on his
_Contes_, and, in biographical works the tales were long attributed to
his son. But M. Paul Lacroix declares that this son was nineteen years
of age when the stories appeared. This looks incredible on the face of
it. Mlle. L'Heritier could hardly have said about a young man of
nineteen, that he 'occupe si spirituellement les amusemens de son
enfance' in writing out _Contes naifs_. Nor would a man of that age, in
a century too, when the young took on them manly duties so early,
describe himself in his dedicatory letter as 'un enfant.' M. Charles
Giraud gives the boy's age as ten, without citing his authority. (Lyons
Edition of 1865, p. lxxiv.) Moreover the idea of educating a young man
of that age by making him write out fairy tales would have seemed, and
would justly have seemed, ridiculous. We must believe that P. Darmancour
was a child when the stories were published, and we may agree with the
Abbé Villiers that the Academician 'put a hand to them.' M. Lacroix's
authority is the discovery by M. Jal of the birth of Pierre Perrault, a
son of Charles, who would have been nineteen in 1697. (Jal's
_Dictionnaire Critique_, p. 1321.) But Jal did not find the register of
baptism of Mademoiselle Perrault. It follows that he may have also
failed to find that of other young Perraults, including 'P. Darmancour.'
Each of Perrault's first sons (May 25, 1675; Oct. 20, 1676), was called
Charles, the second had a Samuel added to the name. Perrault may also
have had two or more Pierres; in any case, unless P. Darmancour were an
idiot, his education could not have been conducted by making him write
out nursery tales at nineteen.]

[Footnote 20: Even in the popular mouth almost any formula may glide
into almost any other, and there is actually a female Hop o' My Thumb in
Aberdeenshire folklore. But Madame d'Aulnoy's seems a wanton confusion.
The Aberdeen female _Hop o' My Thumb_ is _Malty Whuppy_, Folk Lore
Journal, p. 68, 1884. For _Finette Cendron_, see _Nouveaux Contes des
Fées_, par Madame D----, Amsterdam, Roger, 1708.]

[Footnote 21: Paul de Saint Victor, _Hommes et Dieux_, p. 474.]

[Footnote 22: _L'Histoire de Mélusine_ (Barbin, Paris, 1698) is
dedicated like _Histoires et Contes du Tems Passé_ to _Mademoiselle_.
The author says, 'Si tost que la plus célèbre des Fées a sceu que votre
Altesse Royale avoit eu la bonté de donner de favourables audiences aux
Fées du bas ordre, et qu'elle avoit pris quelque plaisir au recit de
leurs avanteures,' she came forward and asked Mademoiselle to patronise
her own. A burlesque 'Privilége en faveur des Fées dans ce temps où l'on
a tant d'engouement pour les Contes des Fées' ends the volume.]


  FAIRIES AND OGRES.

The stories of Perrault are usually called 'Fairy Tales,' and they
deserve the name more than most _contes_, except the artificial
contemporary tales, because in them Fairies or Fées do play a
considerable part. Thus there were seven Fairies, and an old one
'supposed dead or enchanted,' in the _Sleeping Beauty_. There is a Fairy
Godmother in _Cinderella_, and, as will be shown in the study on
_Cinderella_, she takes the part usually given, in traditional versions,
to a cow, a sheep, or a dead mother who has some mystic connection with
the beast. The same remarks apply to the Fairy Godmother in _Peau
d'Ane_. She, too, does for the heroine what beasts do in purely popular
European variants, and in analogous tales from South Africa.

The fairies in _Riquet of the Tuft_ are of little importance, as the
narrative is not really traditional, but of literary invention for the
most part. The fairy in _The Two Wishes_ is not a fairy in the South
African variants where divers magical or animal characters appear, nor
can _Mother Holle_ in Grimm (24) be properly styled a fairy. Thus, of
all Perrault's Fairies only the Fairies of the _Sleeping Beauty_
(repeated in _Riquet of the Tuft_) answer to Fairies as they appear in
genuine popular traditions, under such names as Moirai, or Hathors, in
ancient Greek, and Egyptian versions. These beings attend women in
child-bed, as they attended Althea when she bore Meleager, and they
predict the fortunes of the infant.

Perrault's fairy godmothers (unlike the fairies of real legend) are
machinery of his own, and even he dispenses with Fairies altogether in
_Blue Beard_, _Hop o' my Thumb_, and _Puss in Boots_; while in _Les
Trois Souhaits_ the mythological machinery of the classics is employed,
and Jupiter does what a fairy might have done. It is true that the key
of the forbidden door, in _Blue Beard_, is said to be _Fée_; but this
only means that, like the seven-leagued Boots in _Hop o' my Thumb_
('elles estoient Fées'), the key has magical qualities. The part of
Fairies, then, is very restricted, even in Perrault, while, in
traditional _Märchen_ all over the world, Fairies or beings analogous to
the Fairies appear comparatively seldom.

In spite of this the Fairies have so successfully asserted their title
over popular tales, that a few words on their character and origin seem
not out of place. Fairies are doubtless much older than their name; as
old as the belief in spirits of woods, hills, lonely places, and the
nether world. The familiar names, _fées_, _fades_, are apparently
connected with _Fatum_, the thing spoken, and with _Fata_, the Fates who
speak it, and the God _Fatuus_, or Faunus, and his sister or wife
_Fatua_[23]. Preller quotes the _Fatuae_ as spiritual maidens of the
forests and elements, adding the other names of _Sagae_ and _Sciae_, to
Fatuae, and Fata[24]. He compares the Slavonic Wilis: and, to be brief,
the Apsaras of India, the Nereids of ancient and modern Greece, and the
Good Ladies and Fairies of Scotland, with many of the Melanesian Vuis,
forest-haunting spirits, are all of the same class, are fairy beings
informing the streams and wilds. To these good folk were ascribed gifts
of prophecy, commonly exercised beside the cradle of infancy, _deabus
illis quae fata nascentibus canunt, et dicuntur Carmentes_[25]. As Maury
shows[26], the local Fairies of Roman Gaul were propitiated with altars:

      FATIS
    DERVONIBUS
  V. S. L. M. M. RVFNVS
     SEVERVS.

Just as the Scotch Fairies are euphemistically styled 'The Good Folks,'
'The People of Peace,' the 'Good Ladies,' so it befell the daughter of
Faunus. She was styled 'The Good Goddess,' and her real name was
tabooed[27].

It was natural that when Christianity reached Gaul, where the native
spirits of woods and wells had acquired the name of _Fata_, these minor
goddesses should survive the official heathen religion. The temples of
the high gods were overthrown, or turned into churches, but who could
destroy all the woodland fanes of the Fata, who could uproot the dread
of them from the hearts of peasants? Saints and Councils denounced the
rural offerings to fountains and the roots of trees, but the secret
shame-faced worship lasted deep into the middle ages[28]. It is
conjectured by Maury, as by Walckenaer (_Lettres sur les Contes de
Fées_; Paris, 1826), that the functions of prophetic Gaulish Maidens and
Druidesses were confused with those of the Fairies. Certainly
superstitious ideas of many kinds came under the general head of belief
in _Fata_, _Faes_, _Fadae_, and the _Fées_ of the forest of Broceliande.
The _Fées_ answered, as in the _Sleeping Beauty_, to Greek _Moirai_ or
Egyptian _Hathors_[29]. They nursed women in labour: they foretold the
fate of children. It is said that when a Breton lady was giving birth to
a child, a banquet for the _Fées_ was set in the neighbouring
chamber[30]. But, in popular superstition, if not in Perrault's tales,
the _Fées_ had many other attributes. They certainly inherited much from
the pre-Christian idea of Hades. In the old MS. _Prophesia Thomae de
Erseldoun_[31] the subterranean fairy-world is the under-world of pagan
belief. In the mediæval form of Orpheus and Eurydice (_Orfeo and
Heurodis_), it is not the King of the Dead, but the king of Fairy that
carries off the minstrel's bride. Fairyland, when Orpheus visits it, is
like Homer's Hades.

  '_And sum thurch the bodi hadde wounde
  Wives ther lay on childe bedde
  Sum dede and sum awedde._'

In the same way Chaucer calls Pluto 'King of Fayrie,' and speaks of
'Proserpine and all her fayrie,' in the _Merchant's Tale_. Moreover
Alison Pearson, when she visited Elfland, found there many of the dead,
among them Maitland of Lethington, and one of the Buccleughs. For all
this dealing with fairies and the dead was Alison burned (Scott, _Border
Minstrelsy_, ii. 137-152).

Because the mediæval Fairies had fallen heir to much of the
pre-Christian theory of Hades, it does not follow, of course, that the
Fairies were originally ancestral ghosts. This origin has been claimed
for them, however, and it is pointed out that the stone arrow-heads of
an earlier race are, when found by peasants, called 'elf-shots,' and
attributed to the Fairies. Now the real owners and makers were certainly
a race dead and gone, as far as a race can die. But probably the
ownership of the arrows by elves is only the first explanation that
occurs to the rural fancy. On the other hand, it is candid to note that
the Zulu Amatongo, certainly 'ancestral ghosts,' have much in common
with Scotch and Irish fairies. 'It appears to be supposed,' says Dr.
Callaway, 'that the dead become "good people," as the dead among the
Amazulu become Amatongo, and, in the funeral processions of the "good
people" which some profess to see, are recognised the forms of those who
have lately died, as Umkatshana saw his relatives among the Abapansi,'
and as Alison saw Maitland of Lethington and Buccleuch in Elfland. This
Umkatshana followed a deer into a hole in the ground, where he found
dead men whom he knew[32]. Compare Campbell, _Tales from the West
Highlands_, ii. 56, 65, 66, 106, where it is written, 'the Red Book of
Clanranald is said not to have been dug up, but found _on_ the moss. It
seemed as if the ancestors sent it.'

Those rather gloomy fairies of the nether-world have little but the name
in common with the fairies of Herrick, of the _Midsummer Night's Dream_,
and of Drayton's _Nymphidia_. The gay and dancing elves have a way, in
Greece, of making girls 'dance with the Nereids' till they dance
themselves to death. In the same way it is told of Anne Jefferies, of
St. Teath in Cornwall (born 1626), that one had seen her 'dancing in the
orchard, among the trees, and that she informed him she was then dancing
with the Fairies.' She lived to be seventy, in spite of the Fairies and
the local magistrates who tried her case (Scott, _B.M._ ii. 156).

Perrault's fairies do not wed mortal men, in this differing from the
Indian Apsaras, and the fairies of New Zealand and of Wales. (Taylor's
_New Zealand_, p. 143. Compare story of Urvasi and Pururavas, Max
Müller, _Selected Essays_, i. 408. A number of other examples of Fairy
loves, including one from America, is given in _Custom and Myth_, pp.
68-86.)

On a general view of the evidence, it appears as if the fashion for
fairy tales, in Perrault's time, had made rather free with the old
_Fata_ or _Fées_. Perrault sins much less than the Comtesse d'Aulnoy, or
the Comtesse de Murat, but even he brings in a _Fatua ex machina_ where
popular tradition used other expedients.

As to the Ogres in Perrault, a very few words may suffice. They are
simply the survival, in civilised folklore, of the cannibals,
_Rakshasas_, _Weendigoes_, and man-eating monsters who are the dread of
savage life in Africa, India, and America. Concerning them, their
ferocity, and their stupidity, enough will be said in the study of _Le
Petit Poucet_. As to the name of Ogre, Walckenaer derives it from
_Oigour_, a term for the Hungarian invaders of the ninth century, a
Tartar tribe[33]. Hence he concludes that the Ogre-stories are later
than the others, though, even if 'Ogre' meant 'Tartar,' only the name is
recent, and the Cannibal tales are of extreme antiquity. Littré, on the
other hand, derives _ogre_ from _Orcus_, _cum Orco rationem habere_
meaning to risk one's life. Hop o' my Thumb certainly risked his, when
he had to do 'cum Orco,' if Orcus be _Ogre_ (_Lettres sur les Contes de
Fées_, p. 169-172).

[Footnote 23: Fauno fuit uxor nomine Fatua. Justin, xliii. I. Preller,
_R. M._ I. 385.]

[Footnote 24: _Römische Mythologie_, i. 100. Berlin, 1881.]

[Footnote 25: Preller, _op. cit._ ii. 194, quoting Tertullian, _De An._
39, and Augustine, _Civitas Dei_, iv. 11.]

[Footnote 26: _Les Fées du Moyen Age_, p. 13. Paris, 1843.]

[Footnote 27: Quam quidam, quod nomine dici prohibitum fuerat, _Bonam
Deam_ appellatam volunt. Servius, _Æneid_, viii. 315.]

[Footnote 28: Maury, _Les Fées du Moyen Age_, pp. 15, 16, and his
authorities in the _Capitulaires_ and _Life of Saint Eloi_.]

[Footnote 29: Amyot, in his Plutarch, actually renders _Moirai_ by
_Fées_ (1567).]

[Footnote 30: Maury, p. 31.]

[Footnote 31: Scott, _Border Minstrelsy_, iii. 381.]

[Footnote 32: _Nursery Tales of the Zulus_, p. 317; _Amatongo_, p. 227.]

[Footnote 33: In popular French versions the Ogre is often called _Le
Sarrasin_ to this day (Sébillot in _Mélusine_, May 5, 1887).]




  NOTES ON THE

  SEVERAL TALES BY PERRAULT,

  AND THEIR VARIANTS.


  LES TROIS SOUHAITS.

  _The Three Wishes._

The story of _The Three Wishes_ is very valuable as an illustration of
the difficulties which baffle, and perhaps will never cease to baffle,
the student of popular Tales and their diffusion. The fundamental idea
is that a supernatural being of one sort or another can grant to a
mortal the fulfilment of a wish, or wishes, and that the mortal can
waste the boon. Now probably this idea might occur to any human mind
which entertained the belief in communication between men, and powerful
persons of any sort, Gods, Saints, Tree-spirits, fairies, _follets_ or
the like. The mere habit of prayer, universally human as it is, contains
the germs of the conception. But the notion, as we find it in story,
branches out into a vast variety of shapes, and the problem is to
determine which of these, or whether any one of these is the original
type, and whether the others have been adapted or burlesqued from that
first form, and whether these processes have been the result of literary
transmission, and literary handling, or of oral traditions and popular
fancy. Perhaps a compact statement of some (by no means all) of the
shapes of _The Three Wishes_ may here be serviceable.

1. The granters of the Wishes are gods. The gift is accepted in a pious
spirit, and the desires are noble, and worthy of the donors.

This tale occurs in Ovid, _Metamorphoses_, viii. 610-724. Baucis and
Philemon entertain the gods, who convert their hut into a Temple. They
_wish_ (the man is the speaker) to serve the gods in this fane, and that
neither may outlive the other:

          Nec conjugis umquam
  Busta meae videam: neu sim tumulandus ab illa.

Their wishes are fulfilled.

2. In German popular tales, this idea appears, with additions, in _Rich
and Poor_ (Grimm 87). Here the virtue of the good is contrasted with the
folly of the bad. The Poor man hospitably receives our Lord, and, for
his three wishes, chooses eternal happiness, health and daily bread, and
a new house. The Rich man rejects our Lord, but getting a second chance,
loses his temper, wishes his horse dead, the saddle on his wife's back,
and--the saddle off again!

Now popular fancy has been better pleased with the burlesque ideas in
the second part of this fable, than with the serious moral; and most of
the tales turn on burlesque wishes, leaving the virtuous wishers out of
the story. The narrative also shews a Protean power of altering details,
the wishes vary, the power who grants the wish is different in different
_Märchen_, the person whose folly wastes the wish may be the husband, or
may be the wife.

A very old form of the Wasted Wish, originally no doubt a popular form,
won its way into literature in the _Pantschatantra_. The tale has also
been annexed by Buddhism, as Buddhism annexed most tales, by the simple
process of making Sakya Muni the hero or narrator of the adventures.

The _Pantschatantra_ is a collection of fables in Sanskrit. In its
original form, according to Mr. Max Müller, its date can be fixed, by
aid of an ancient Persian translation, as previous to 550 A.D. 'At that
time a collection somewhat like the Pa_n_katantra, though much  more
extensive, must have existed[34].' By various channels the stories of
the _Pantschatantra_ reached Persia, Arabia, Greece, and thence were
rendered into Latin, and again, were paraphrased in different vernacular
languages, by literary people. But when we find, as we do, a story in
the _Pantschatantra_ and a similar or analogous story in the Arabic
_Book of Sindibad_ (earlier than the tenth century), and again in the
Greek _Syntipas_ (eleventh and twelfth century), and again in Latin, or
Spanish, or French literature, we cannot, perhaps, always be sure that
the tale is derived from India through literary channels. Whoever will
compare the _Wish_ story of the _Double-headed Weaver_ in the
_Pantschatantra_[35] with _The Three Wishes_ in the _Book of Sindibad_
(Comparetti. _Folk Lore Society_, 1882, p. 147), and again, with Marie
de France's twenty-fourth Fable (_Dou Vilain qui prist un folet_), and
yet again with Perrault's _Trois Souhaits_, and, lastly, with the
popular tales among Grimm's variants, will find many perplexing problems
before him[36]. The differences in the details and in the conduct of the
story are immense. Did the various authors borrow little but the main
conception--the wasted wishes? Are the variations the result of literary
caprice and choice? Has the story travelled from India by two
channels,--(1) literary, in _Pantschatantra_, and _Syntipas_ with the
translations; (2) oral, by word of mouth from people to people? Are the
_popular_ versions derived from literature, or from oral tradition? Is
the oldest literary version, that of the _Pantschatantra_, more akin to
the _original_ version than some of the others which meet us later?
Finally, might not the idea of wasted wishes occur independently to
minds in different ages and countries, and may not some of the versions
be of independent origin, and in no way borrowed from India? Is there,
indeed, any reason at all for supposing that so simple a notion was
invented, once for all, in India?

It is easy to ask these questions, it is desirable to bear them in mind,
so that we may never lose sight of the complexity and difficulty of the
topic. But it is practically impossible to answer them once for all.

The nature of the problem may now be illustrated by a few examples. In
the story of the _Pantschatantra_, the granter of the wish (there is but
one wish) is a tree-dwelling spirit. A very stupid weaver one day broke
part of his loom. He went out to cut down a tree near the shore, meaning
to fashion it for his purpose, when a spirit, who dwelt in the timber,
cried, 'Spare this tree.' The weaver said he must starve if he did not
get the wood, when the spirit replied, 'Ask anything else you please.'
The barber, being consulted, advised the weaver to wish to be king. The
weaver's wife cried, 'No, stay as you are, but ask for two heads, and
four hands, to do double work.' He got his wish, but was killed by the
villagers, who very naturally supposed him to be a Rakshasa, or ogre.
The moral is enunciated by the barber, 'Let no man take woman's
counsel.' The poor woman's lack of immoderate ambition might seem
laudable to some moralists.

Here the peculiarities are: A tree-ghost grants the wish.

There is only one wish.

It is made on a woman's advice.

It causes the death of the wisher[37].

The story is next found in the various forms of the _Book of Sindibad_,
Greek, Hebrew, Persian, Arabic, and old Spanish, a book mentioned by all
Arabic authors of the tenth century, and of Indian and Buddhistic
origin[38]. As told in the various forms of _Sindibad_, the tale of _The
Three Wishes_ takes this shape. A man has a friendly spirit (a she-devil
in the Spanish _Libro de los Engannos_), who is obliged to desert his
company, but leaves him certain formulæ, by dint of repeating which he
will have Three Wishes granted to him. The tree-spirit has disappeared,
the one wish has become three. The man consults with his wife, who
suggests that he should desire, not two heads and four hands, but an
obscene and disgusting bodily transformation of another sort. He wishes
the wish, is horrified by the result, and, on the woman's hint, asks to
have all that embarrasses him removed. The granting of the wish leaves
him with 'a frightful _minus_ quantity,' and he expends the third wish
in getting restored to his pristine and natural condition. The woman
explains that she had not counselled him to desire wealth, lest he
should weary of her and desert her. This, at least, is the conclusion in
the Hebrew version, in the _Parables of Sandabas_ (Deulin, _Contes de Ma
Mère L'Oye_, p. 71).

How are we to account for this metamorphosis of the story in the
_Pantschatantra_? Is the alteration a piece of Arabian humour? Was there
another Indian version corresponding to the shape of the tale in the
_Book of Sindibad_? The questions cannot be answered with our present
knowledge.

Another change, and a very remarkable one, occurs in the _Fables_ of
Marie de France. Of Marie not much is known. In the _Conclusion_ of her
Fables, she says--

  'Au finement de cest escrit
  K'én Romanz ai turné et dit,
  Me numerai par remembraunce
  Marie ai num, si sui de Fraunce.

       *     *     *     *     *

  Pur amur le cumte Willaume
  Le plus vaillant de cest Royaume,
  M'entremis de cest livre feire
  E de l'Angleiz en Roman treire,
  Ysopet apeluns ce livre
  Qu'il traveilla et fist escrire;
  De Griu en Latin le turna.
  Li Rois Henris qui moult l'ama
  Le translata puis en Engleiz
  E jeo l'ai rimé en Franceiz.'

That is to say, King Henry had translated into English a collection of
fables and _contes_ attributed to Æsop, and Marie rendered the English
into French. Now Æsop certainly did not write the story of _The Three
Wishes_. The text before Marie was probably a mere congeries of tales
and fables, some of the set usually attributed to Æsop, some from
various other sources. The Latin version, the model of the English
version, was that assigned to a certain, or uncertain Romulus, whom
Marie, in her preface, calls an emperor. Probably he borrowed from
Phædrus, though he boasts that he rendered his fables out of the Greek.
M. de Roquefort thinks he did not flourish before the eleventh or
twelfth century[39]. Who was _li rois Henris_ who turned the fables into
Marie's English text? She lived under our Henry III. Perhaps conjecture
may prefer Henry Beauclerk, our Henry I.

In any case Marie manifestly did render the fables, or some of the
fables, in _Le dit d'Ysopet_ out of English. The presence of English
words in her French seems to raise a strong presumption in favour of the
truth of the assertion. One of these English words occurs in her form of
_The Three Wishes_ (Fable xxiv), called _Dou Vilain qui prist un Folet_,
also _Des Troiz Oremens_, or _Du Vileins et de sa Fame_. A Vilein
captured a Folet (fairy or brownie?) who granted him Three Wishes. The
_Folet_ resembles the tree-bogle of the _Pantschatantra_. The vilein
gave two wishes to his wife. Long they lived without using the wishes.
One day, when they had a marrow bone for dinner, and found it difficult
to extract the marrow, the wife wished that her husband had--

  'tel bec came li plereit
  E cum li Huite cox aveit.'

The Huite cox is an English word, woodcock, in disguise. The husband, in
a rage, wished his wife a woodcock's beak also, and there they sat, each
with a very long bill, and two wishes wasted. There Marie leaves them--

  'Deus Oremanz unt ja perduz
  Que nus n'en est a bien venuz,'

'with two wishes lost, and no good gained thereby.' Manifestly the third
wish was expended in a restoration of human noses to each of them. The
moral is that ill befalls them--

  'qui trop creient autrui parole.'

We naturally wonder whether this version was borrowed from one or other
shape of _Syntipas_. If it was, did the change come in the Latin
handling of it, or in the English? Or is it not possible that the
version worked on by Marie had a _popular_ origin, whether derived by
oral transmission from some popular Indian shape of the story, which had
filtered through to the West, or the child of native Teutonic wit? There
seems to be no certain criterion in a case like this. Certainly no
mediæval wag was likely to alter, out of modesty, the form of the tale
in _Syntipas_ and its derivatives, though Marie would not have rhymed
that offensive _conte_ if she had met with it in the English collection.
Unluckily one is not acquainted with any version of _The Three Wishes_
among backward and remote races, American or African. If such a version
were known (and it may, of course, exist), we might argue that the tale
was 'universally human.' There is nothing in it, as told in
_Pantschatantra_, to make it seem essentially and peculiarly Indian, and
incapable of having been invented elsewhere.

A fourteenth-century version (quoted by M. Deulin from _Fabliaux et
Contes_ published by St. Méon, vol. iv. p. 386) amplifies all that is
least refined in _Sendabar_ and in _Sindibad_. St. Martin grants the
wishes, there are four of them, and nobody is one penny the better. With
Philippe de Vigneules (1505-1514, the seventy-eighth of his hundred
_Nouvelles_), God grants three wishes to a wedded pair. The woman wishes
a new leg for her pot, the man wishes her _le pied au ventre_, and then
wishes it back again. M. Deulin found this form in living popular
tradition, at Leuze in Hainaut.

The _Souhaits_ of La Fontaine (_Fables_, vii. 6) has this peculiarity,
that the giver of the wishes, as in Marie de France and in _Sindibad_,
is a Follet or brownie, or familiar spirit, obliged to leave his
friends. He offers them three wishes; first, they ask for wealth and are
embarrassed by their riches, then for a restoration of their mediocrity,
then for wisdom.

  'C'est un trésor qui n'embarrasse point.'

La Fontaine's source is obscure; had he known _Syntipas_, he might (or
might not) have introduced the story among his _Contes_. Perhaps it was
too rude even for that unabashed collection.

As for Perrault, he probably drew from a popular tradition his _Aune de
Boudin_. Collin de Plancy (_OEuvres Choisies de Ch. Perrault_, Paris,
1826, 240) gives a curious rustic version. Three brothers dance with the
Fairies, who offer them a wish apiece. The eldest, as heir of the
paternal property, wants no more, but, as wish he must, asks that their
calf may cure the colic of every invalid who seizes it by the tail. (How
manifestly Indian in origin is this introduction of the sacred beast
whose tail is grasped by the pious Hindoo in his latest hours!) The
youngest brother wishes the horns of cow and calf on his brother's head,
the second wishes a bull's head on his brother's shoulders, and the
Fairies make these wild wishes of none avail.

Manifestly the fundamental idea is capable of infinite transformations,
literary or popular: a good example is the play of _Le Bucheron_, by
Guichard and Philidor, acted in 1763.

The story has no connection with the three successful wishes by aid of
which the devil is defeated in a number of popular tales belonging to a
different cycle. All these are inspired, however, by the great god
Wunsch, who presides over Wishing Gates.

  'Would I could wish my wishes all to rest,
  And know to wish the wish that should be best,

says Clough, better inspired than Perrault's _Bucheron_.

[Footnote 34: _Selected Essays_, i. 504.]

[Footnote 35: Benfey, ii. 341.]

[Footnote 36: See _Poésies de Marie de France, Poète Anglo-Normande du
xiiie Siècle_, vol. ii. p. 140. Paris, 1820.]

[Footnote 37: Benfey, _Pantschatantra_, ii. 341.]

[Footnote 38: Comparetti, _Book of Sindibad_, p. 3. Benfey,
_Pantschatantra_, i. 38.]

[Footnote 39: _Poésies de Marie de France_, vol. ii. p. 53.]


  LA BELLE AU BOIS DORMANT.

  _The Sleeping Beauty._

The idea of a life which passes ages in a secular sleep is as old as the
myth of Endymion. But it would be difficult to name any classical legend
which closely corresponds with the story of the Sleeping Beauty. The
first incident of importance is connected with the very widely spread
belief in the Fates, or Moirai, or Hathors (in Ancient Egypt), or
fairies, who come to the bedside of Althæa, or of the Egyptian Queen, or
to the christening of the child in _La Belle au Bois Dormant_, and
predict the fortunes of the newly born. In an Egyptian papyrus of the
Twentieth Dynasty there is a tale, beginning, just like Perrault's, with
the grief of a king and queen, who have no child, or at least no son.
Instead of going _à toutes les Eaux du monde_, they appeal to the gods,
who hear their prayers, and the queen gives birth to a little boy.
Beside his cradle the Hathors announce that he shall perish by a
crocodile, a serpent, or a dog. The story, in Egyptian, now turns into
one of the common myths as to the impossibility of evading Destiny[40].
In Perrault's _Conte_, of course, fairies take the place of the Fates
from whom perhaps _Fée_ is derived. When the fairies have met comes in
another old incident--one of them, like Discord at the wedding of
Peleus, has not been invited, and she prophesies the death of the
Princess. This is commuted, by a friendly fay, into a sleep of a hundred
years: the sleep to be caused, as the death was to have been, by a prick
from a spindle. The efforts of the royal family to evade the doom by
proscribing spindles are as futile as usual in these cases. The Princess
and all her people fall asleep, and the story enters the cycle of which
Brynhild's wooing, in the _Volsung's Saga_, is the heroic type. Brynhild
is thus described by the singing wood-peckers,--

  'Soft on the fell
  A shield-may sleepeth,
  The lime-trees' red plague
  Playing about her.
  The sleep-thorn set Odin
  Into that maiden
  For her choosing in war
  The one he willed not.'

Sigurd is bidden to awaken her, and this he does, rending her mail with
his magic sword. But the rest of the tragic story does not correspond
with _La Belle au Bois Dormant_. Perrault's tale has its closest
companion in Grimm's _Little Briar Rose_ (90), which lacks the
conclusion about the wicked mother-in-law. Her conduct, again, recurs in
various tales quite unlike _La Belle_ in general plot. The incident of
the sleep-thorn, or something analogous, occurs in _Surya Bai_ (_Old
Deccan Days_), where a prick from the poisoned nail of a demon acts as
the soporific. To carry poison under the nail is one of the devices of
the Voudou or Obi man in Hayti. Surya Bai, when wakened and married by a
Rajah, is the victim of the jealousy, not of an ogress mother-in-law,
but of another wife, and _that_ story glides into a form of the Egyptian
tale _The Two Brothers_ (Maspero, i.). The sleep-thorn, or poisoned
nail, takes again in Germany the shape of the poisoned comb.
_Snow-white_ is wounded therewith by the jealousy of a beautiful
step-mother, with a yet fairer step-daughter (Grimm, 53). In mediæval
romances, as in _Perceforest_, an incident is introduced whereby the
sleeping maid becomes a mother. Lucina, Themis, and Venus take the part
of the Fairies, Fates, or Hathors. In the Neapolitan _Pentamerone_ the
incident of the girl becoming a mother in her sleep is repeated. The
father (as in _Surya Bai_) is a married man, and the girl, Thalia,
suffers from the jealousy of the first wife, as Surya Bai does. The
first wife wants to eat Thalia's children, _à diverses sauces_, which
greatly resembles Perrault's _sauce Robert_. The children of Thalia are
named Sun and Moon, while those of the Sleeping Beauty are L'Aurore et
Le Jour. The jealous wife is punished, like the Ogre mother-in-law[41].

While the idea of a long sleep may possibly have been derived from the
repose of Nature in winter, it seems useless to try to interpret _La
Belle au Bois Dormant_ as a Nature myth throughout. The story, like all
_contes_, is a patchwork of incidents, which recur elsewhere in
different combinations. Even the names Le Jour and L'Aurore only appear
in such late and literary forms as the _Pentamerone_, where they are
mixed up with Thalia, clearly a fanciful name for the mother, as
fanciful as that of the sleeping Zellandine, who marries the god Mars in
_Perceforest_. As an example of the length to which some mythologists
will go, may be mentioned M. André Lefèvre's discovery that Poufle, the
dog of the Sleeping Beauty, is the Vedic Sarama in search of the
Dawn.

[Footnote 40: Maspero, _Contes Egyptiens_, p. 33.]

[Footnote 41: _Contes de Ma Mère L'Oye_, p. 157.]


  LE PETIT CHAPERON ROUGE[42].

  _Little Red Riding Hood._

Perrault has not concealed the moral which he thought obvious in this
brief narrative. There are wolves--

    '_Qui suivent les jeunes Demoiselles
  Jusques dans les maisons, jusques dans les Ruelles!_'

Racine, in an early letter, admits that he himself has been one of these
wolves.

     'Il faut être régulier avec les Réguliers, comme j'ai été
     loup avec vous, et avec les autres loups, vos compères.[43]'

But the nurses from whom Perrault or his little boy heard _Le petit
Chaperon Rouge_ had probably no such moral ideas as these. They _may_
have hinted at the undesirable practice of loitering when one is sent on
an errand, but the punishment is out of all proportion to the offence.
As it stands, the tale is merely meant to waken a child's terror and
pity, and probably the narrator ends it by making a pounce, in the
character of Wolf, _c'est pour te manger_, at the little listener. This
was the correct 'business' in our old Scotch nurseries, when we were
told _The Cattie sits in the Kiln-Ring Spinning_.

  'By cam' a cattie and ate it a' up my loesome,
      Loesome Lady!
  And sae will I you--worrie, worrie, gnash, gnash,
      Said she, said she!'

'The old nurse's imitation of the _gnash_, _gnash_, which she played off
upon the youngest urchin lying in her lap, was electric' (Chambers,
_Popular Rhymes of Scotland_, 1842, p. 54).

If _Little Red Riding Hood_ ended, in all variants, where it ends in
Perrault, we might dismiss it, with the remark that the _machinery_ of
the story is derived from 'the times when beasts spoke,' or were
believed to be capable of speaking. But it is well known that in the
German form, _Little Red Cap_ (Grimm 26), the tale by no means ends with
the triumph of the wolf. Little Red Cap and her grandmother are
resuscitated, 'the wolf it was that died.' This may either have been the
original end, omitted by Perrault because it was too wildly impossible
for the nurseries of the time of Louis XIV, or children may have
insisted on having the story 'turn out well.' In either case the German
_Märchen_ preserves one of the most widely spread mythical incidents in
the world,--the reappearance of living people out of the monster that
has devoured them.

In literature, this incident first meets us in the myth of Cronus
(Hesiod, _Theog._ 497; Pausanias, x. 24), where Cronus disgorges his
swallowed children alive, after gulping up the stone in swaddling bands
which he had taken for Zeus, his youngest infant. He had previously
dined on a young foal that he was assured his wife had just borne, when,
in reality, the child was Poseidon. In this adventure Cronus united the
mistake of the ogress mother-in-law, in _La Belle au Bois Dormant_, who
ate the kid in place of the Sleeping Beauty's boy, the adventure of the
king who hears his wife has borne a beast-child, and the adventure of
the Wolf who disgorges his prey alive. The local fancy of Arne in
Arcadia had combined all these ideas of _Märchen_ into one divine myth
(Pausan. viii. 8, 2). It would be superfluous to enumerate here all the
savage and civilised stories of beings first swallowed and then
disgorged alive. A fabulous monster Kwai Hemm is the swallower in
Bushman story. The Iqong qongqo takes the _rôle_ among the Kaffirs.
There are some five examples in Callaway's _Zulu Nursery Tales_. _Night_
is the swallower in Melanesia (Codrington, _Journal Anthrop. Inst._ Feb.
1881), while the Sun swallows the stars in a Piute myth. It is quite
possible that a savage theory of Night swallowing and restoring Light,
or of the Sun swallowing the stars, is the origin of the conception[44].
The Australians tell it in a shape not unlike Grimm's. The Eagle met the
Moon and offered him some Kangaroo meat. The Moon ate up the Kangaroo,
and then swallowed the Eagle. The wives of the Eagle met the Moon, who
asked them the way to a spring. As he stooped to drink, they cut him
open with a stone tomahawk, and extracted the Eagle, who came alive
again[45]. In Germany it was with a pair of scissors that the Wolf was
cut up, and he was then stuffed with stones (as in Grimm 5, _The Wolf
and the Seven Little Kids_). The stones kill him in _Little Red Cap_; in
the German tale, their weight drags him into the well, where he, like
the Australian Moon, wants to drink after his banquet. In Pomerania a
ghost takes the Wolf's _rôle_, the stones are felt to be rather 'heavy'
by the ghost, and the child escapes[46].

The whole story has been compared by M. Husson to the adventure of
Vartika, whom the Asvins rescue from the throat of a wolf. Little Red
Riding Hood thus becomes the Dawn. Vartika is a bird, the Quail, 'i.e.
the returning bird. But as a being delivered by the Asvins, the
representatives of Day and Night, Vartika can only be the returning
Dawn, delivered from the mouth of the wolf, i. e. the dark night[47].'

It is hard to see why the Night, as one of the Asvins, should deliver
the Dawn from the Night, as the Wolf. On the identification of the
Asvins with this or that aspect of Light and Darkness, Muir may be
consulted. 'This allegorical interpretation seems unlikely to be
correct, as it is difficult to suppose that the phenomena in question
should have been alluded to under such a variety of names and
circumstances.' (_Sanskrit Texts_, v. 248. Prof. Goldstücker thinks the
Asvins are themselves the crepuscular mingling of light and dark, which,
in the other theory, is the struggle of quail and wolf, _op. cit._ v.
257. M. Bergaigne supposes that the Asvins are deities of dawn, _La
Religion Védique_, ii. 431.)

These considerations lead us far enough from Perrault into 'worlds not
realised.' Vartika (who, in these theories, answers to _Le Petit
Chaperon Rouge_) has been compared by Mr. Max Müller, not only to the
returning Dawn, but to the returning year, _Vertumnus_. He notes that
the Greek word for quail is _ortyx_, that Apollo and Artemis were born
in Ortygia, an old name of Delos, and that 'here is a real traditional
chain.' But 'it would be a bold assertion to say that the story of _Red
Riding Hood_ was really a metamorphosis of an ancient story of the
rosy-fingered Eos, or the Vedic Eos with her red horses, and that the
two ends, Ushas and Rothkäppchen, are really held together by an
unbroken traditional chain.'

We shall leave the courage of this opinion to M. Husson, merely
observing that, as a matter of fact, Dawn is _not_ swallowed by Night.
Sunset (which is red) is so swallowed, but then sunset is not 'a young
maiden carrying messages,' like Red Riding Hood and Ushas. To be sure,
the convenient Wolf is regarded by mythologists as 'a representative of
the sun or of the night,' at will. He 'doubles the part,' and 'is the
useful Wolf,' as the veteran Blenkinsopp, in _Pendennis_, was called
'The useful Blenkinsopp.'

[Footnote 42: _Contes de Charles Perrault_, Paris, _s. a._ p. lxiv.
Perrault's love of refining is not idle in _Le Chaperon Rouge_. In the
_popular_ versions, in Brittany and the Nièvre, the wolf puts the
grandmother in the pot, and her blood in bottles, and makes the
unconscious child eat and drink her ancestress! The cock or the robin
redbreast warns her in vain, and she is swallowed. (_Mélusine_, May 5,
1887.)]

[Footnote 43: A. M. de la Fontaine, à Usez, le ii. Nov. 1661.]

[Footnote 44: Tylor, _Prim. Cult._ i. 338.]

[Footnote 45: Brough Smyth, _Natives of Victoria_, i. p. 432.]

[Footnote 46: Grimm, Note on 5.]

[Footnote 47: Max Müller's _Selected Essays_, i. 565.]


  LA BARBE BLEUE.

  _Blue Beard._

The story of Blue Beard, as told by Perrault, is, of all his collection,
the most apt to move pity and terror. It has also least of the
supernatural. Here are no talking beasts, no fairies, nor ogres. Only
the enchanted key is _fée_, or _wakan_ as the Algonkins say, that is,
possesses magical properties. In all else the story is a drama of daily
and even of contemporary life, for Blue Beard has the gilded coaches and
embroidered furniture of the seventeenth century, and his wife's
brothers hold commissions in the dragoons and musketeers. The story
relies for its interest on the curiosity of the wife (the moral motive),
on the vision of the slain women, and on the suspense of waiting while
Sister Anne watches from the tower. These simple materials, admirably
handled, make up the terrible story of _Blue Beard_.

Attempts have been made to find for _Blue Beard_ an historical
foundation. M. Collin de Plancy mentions a theory that the hero was a
seigneur of the house of Beaumanoir (_OEuvres Choisies de Ch. Perrault_,
p. 40, Paris, 1826). Others have fancied that Blue Beard was a popular
version of the deeds of Gilles de Retz, the too celebrated monster of
mediæval history, or of a more or less mythical Breton prince of the
sixth century, Cormorus or Comorre, who married Sainte Trophime or
Triphime, and killed her, as he had killed his other wives, when she was
about to become a mother. She was restored to life by St. Gildas[48]. If
there is a trace of the _Blue Beard_ story in the legend of the Saint,
it does not follow that the legend is the source of the story. The
_Märchen_ of _Peau d'Ane_ has been absorbed into the legend of Sainte
Dipne or Dympne, and the names of saints, like the names of gods and
heroes in older faiths, had the power of attracting _Märchen_ into their
cycle.

_Blue Beard_ is essentially popular and traditional. The elements are
found in countries where Gilles de Retz and Comorre and Sainte Triphime
were never known. The leading idea, of curiosity punished, of the box or
door which may not be opened, and of the prohibition infringed with evil
results, is of world-wide distribution. In many countries this notion
inspires the myths of the origin of Death[49]. In German _Märchen_ there
are several parallels, more or less close, to _Blue Beard_ (Grimm 3, 40,
46). In _Our Lady's Child_ (3) the Virgin entrusts a little girl with
keys of thirteen doors, of which she may only open twelve. Behind each
door she found an apostle, behind the thirteenth the Trinity, in a glory
of flame, like Zeus when he consumed Semele. The girl's finger became
golden with the light, as Blue Beard's key was dyed with the blood. The
child was banished from heaven, and her later adventures are on the
lines of the falsely accused wife, like those of the _Belle au Bois
Dormant_, with the Virgin for mother-in-law and with a repentance for a
moral conclusion. In the _Robber Bridegroom_ there is a girl betrothed
to a woman-slayer; she detects and denounces him, pretending, as in the
old English tale, she is describing a dream. 'Like the old tale, my
Lord, it is not so, nor 'twas not so; but indeed God forbid that it
should be so[50].' Except for the 'larder' of the Robber, and of Mr. Fox
in the English variant, these stories do not closely resemble _Blue
Beard_. In Grimm's _Fitcher's Bird_ (46) the resemblance is closer. A
man, apparently a beggar, carries off the eldest of three sisters to a
magnificent house, and leaves her with the keys, an egg, and the
prohibition to open a certain door. She opens it, finds a block, an axe,
a basin of blood, and the egg falling into the blood refuses to be
cleansed. The man slays her, her second sister shares her fate, the
third leaves the egg behind when she visits the secret room, and
miraculously restores her sisters to life by reuniting their limbs. The
same idea occurs in the Kaffir tale of the Ox (Callaway, _Nursery Tales
of the Zulus_, p. 230). The rest of the story, with the escape from the
monster, has no connection with _Blue Beard_, except that the wretch is
put to death. Indeed, it would have been highly inconvenient for Blue
Beard's surviving bride if the dead ladies had been resuscitated. Her
legal position would have been ambiguous, and she could not have
inherited the gold coaches and embroidered furniture. Grimm originally
published another German form of _Blue Beard_ (62 in first edition), but
withdrew it, being of opinion that it might have been derived from
Perrault. The story of the Third Calender in the _Arabian Nights_ (Night
66) has nothing in common with Blue Beard but the prohibition to open a
door.

In Italy[51] the Devil is the wooer, the closed door opens on hell: the
rest, the adventures of three sisters, resembles Grimm's _Fitcher's
Bird_, with a touch of humour. The Devil, seeing the resuscitated girls,
is daunted by the idea of facing three wives, and decamps. He had no
scruple, it will be seen, about marrying his deceased wife's sister. The
Russian like the Oriental stories generally make a man indulge the fatal
curiosity, and open the forbidden door. Mr. Ralston quotes from Löwe's
_Esthnische Märchen_ (No. 20) a tale almost too closely like Perrault's.
There is a sister, and the goose boy takes the _rôle_ of rescuer. M. de
Gubernatis thinks that the key 'is perhaps the Moon!' (_Zoological
Mythology_, 1. 168). In the Gaelic version the heroine is cleansed of
blood by a grateful Cat, whose services her sisters had neglected
(Campbell, _Tales of West Highlands_, No. 41). In the _Katha Sarit
Sagara_ (iii. p. 223) a hero, Saktideva, is forbidden to approach a
certain palace terrace. He breaks the taboo, and finds three dead
maidens in three pavilions. A horse then kicks him into a lake, and,
whereas he had been in the Golden City, hard to win, he finds himself at
home in Vardhamana. The affair is but an incident in the medley of
incidents, some resembling passages in the Odyssey, which make up the
story (compare Ralston's note, _Russian Fairy Tales_, p. 99).

From these brief analyses it will be plain that, in point of art,
Perrault's tale has a great advantage over its popular rivals. It is at
once more sober and more terrible, and (especially when compared with
the confusion of incidents in the _Katha Sarit Sagara_) possesses an
epical unity of idea and action.

In spite of this artistic character, Perrault's tale is clearly of
popular origin, as the existence of variants in the folklore of other
countries demonstrates. But the details are so fluctuating, that we need
not hope to find in them memories of ancient myth, nor is it safe to
follow M. André Lefèvre, when he thinks that, in the two avenging
brothers, he recognises the Vedic Asvins.

[Footnote 48: The passages in the legend of Sainte Triphime are quoted
by M. Deulin, _Contes de Ma Mère l'Oye_, p. 178. See also _Annuaire
Hist. et Arch. de Bretagne_, Année 1862. The Saint has a warning vision
of the dead wives, but not in consequence of opening a forbidden door.]

[Footnote 49: A partial collection of these will be found in _La
Mythologie_, Lang. Paris 1886. Australians, Ningphos, Greeks (Pandora's
box), the Montaguais of Labrador (_Relations de la Nouvelle France_,
1634), the Odahwah Indians (Hind's _Explorations in Labrador_, i. 61,
note 2), are examples of races which believe death to have come into the
world as the punishment of an infringed prohibition of this sort. The
deathly swoon of Psyche, in _The Golden Ass_ of Apuleius, when she has
opened the pyx of Proserpine, is another instance.]

[Footnote 50: Compare Mrs. Hunt's note to Grimm, i. 389.]

[Footnote 51: Crane, p. 78.]


  LE MAISTRE CHAT, OU LE CHAT BOTTÉ.

  _Puss in Boots._

Everybody knows Puss in Boots. He is, as Nodier says, the Figaro of the
nursery, as Hop o' My Thumb is the Ulysses, and Blue Beard the Othello;
and thus he is of interest to all children, and to all men who remember
their childhood. Ulysses himself did not travel farther than the story
of the patron of the Marquis de Carabas has wandered, and few things can
be more curious than to follow the Master-Cat in his migrations. For
many reasons the history of _Puss in Boots_, though it has been rather
neglected, throws a good deal of light on that very dark question, the
diffusion of popular tales. As soon as we read it in Perrault, we find
that Monsieur Perrault was at a loss for a moral to his narrative. In
fact, as he tells it, there is _no_ moral to the Master-Cat. Puss is a
perfectly unscrupulous adventurer who, for no reason but the fun of the
thing, dubs the miller's son marquis, makes a royal marriage for him, by
a series of amusing frauds, and finally enriches him with the spoils of
a murdered ogre. In the absence of any moral Perrault has to invent
one--which does not apply.

  'Aux jeunes gens pour l'ordinaire,
  L'industrie et le savoir-faire
  Valent mieux que des biens acquis.'

Now the 'young person,' the cat's master, had shown no 'industry'
whatever, except in so far as he was a _chevalier d'industrie_, thanks
to his cat. These obvious truths pained Mr. George Cruikshank when he
tried to illustrate _Puss in Boots_, and found that the romance was
quite unfit for the young. 'When I came to look carefully at that story,
I felt _compelled_ to rewrite it, and alter the character of it to a
certain extent, for, as it stood, the tale was a succession of
successful falsehoods--a _clever_ lesson in lying, a system of
_imposture_ rewarded by the greatest worldly advantages. A _useful_
lesson, truly, to be impressed upon the minds of children.' So Mr.
Cruikshank made the tale didactic, showing how the Marquis de Carabas
was the real heir, 'kep' out of his own' by the landgrabbing ogre, and
how puss was a gamekeeper metamorphosed into a cat as a punishment for
his repining disposition. This performance of Mr. Cruikshank was
denounced by Mr. Dickens in _Household Words_ as a 'fraud on the
fairies,' and 'the intrusion of a whole hog of unwieldy dimensions into
the fairy flower-garden[52].'

The Master-Cat probably never made any child a rogue, but no doubt his
conduct was flagrantly immoral. And this brings us to one of the
problems of the science of nursery tales. When we find a story told by
some peoples _with_ a moral, and by other peoples _without_ a moral, are
we to suppose that the tale was originally narrated for the moral's
sake, and that the forms in which there is _no_ moral are degenerate and
altered versions? For example, the Zulus, the Germans, the French, and
the Hindoos have all a nursery tale in which someone, by a series of
lucky accidents and exchanges, goes on making good bargains, and rising
from poverty to wealth. In French Flanders this is the tale of _Jean
Gogué_; in Grimm it is _The Golden Goose_; in Zulu it is part of the
adventures of the Hermes of Zulu myth, Uhlakanyana. In two of these the
hero possesses some trifling article which is injured, and people give
him something better in exchange, till, like Jean Gogué, for example, he
marries the king's daughter[53]. Now these tales have no moral. The hero
is thought neither better nor worse of because of his series of
exchanges. But in modern Hindostan the story _has_ a moral. The rat,
whose series of exchanges at last win him a king's daughter, is held up
to contempt as a warning to bargain-hunters. He is not happy with his
bride, but escapes, leaving his tail, half his hair, and a large piece
of his skin behind him, howling with pain, and vowing that 'never,
never, never again would he make a bargain[54].' Here then is a tale
told with a moral, and _for_ the moral in India, but with no moral in
Zululand and France. Are we to suppose that India was the original
source of the narrative, that it was a parable invented for the moral's
sake, and that it spread, losing its moral (as the rat lost his tail),
to Europe and South Africa? Or are we to suppose that originally the
narrative was a mere _Schwank_, or popular piece of humour, and that the
mild, reflective Hindoo moralised it into a parable or fable? The
question may be argued either way; but the school of Benfey and M.
Cosquin, holding that almost all our stories were invented in India,
should prefer the former alternative.

Now _Puss in Boots_ has this peculiarity, that out of France, or rather
out of the region influenced by Perrault's version of the history, a
moral usually does inform the legend of the Master-Cat, or master-fox,
or master-gazelle, or master-jackal, or master-dog, for each of these
animals is the hero in different countries. Possibly, then, the story
had originally what it sadly lacks in its best-known shape, a moral; and
possibly _Puss in Boots_ was in its primitive shape (like _Toads and
Diamonds_) a novel with a purpose. But where was the novel first
invented?

We are not likely to discover for certain the cradle of the race of the
Master-Cat--the 'cat's cradle' of _Puss in Boots_. But the record of his
achievements is so well worth studying, because the possible area from
which it may have arisen is comparatively limited.

There are many stories known all the world over, such as the major part
of the adventures of _Hop o' My Thumb_, which might have been invented
anywhere, and might have been invented by men in a low state of
savagery. The central idea in _Hop o' My Thumb_, for example, is the
conception of a hero who falls into the hands of cannibals, and by a
trick makes the cannibal slay, and sometimes eat, his own kinsfolk,
mother, or wife, or child, while the hero escapes. This legend is well
known in South Africa, in South Siberia, and in Aberdeenshire; and in
Greece it made part of the Minyan legend of Athamas and Ino, murder
being substituted for cannibalism. Namaquas, in Southern Africa; Eskimo,
in Northern America, and Athenians (as Aeschylus shows in the
_Eumenides_, 244), are as familiar as Maoris, or any of us, with the
ogre's favourite remark, 'I smell the smell of a mortal man.'

Now it is obvious that these ideas--the trick played by the hero on the
cannibal, and the turning of the tables--might occur to the human mind
wherever cannibalism was a customary peril: that is, among any low
savages. It does not matter whether the cannibal is called a _rakshása_
in India, or an _ogre_ in France, or a _weendigo_ in Labrador, the
notion is the same, and the trick played by the hero is simple and
obvious[55]. Therefore _Hop o' My Thumb_ may have been invented
anywhere, by any people on a low level of civilisation. But _Puss in
Boots_ cannot have been invented by savages of a very backward race or
in a really 'primitive' age. The very essence of _Puss in Boots_ is the
sudden rise of a man, by aid of a cunning animal, from the depths of
poverty to the summit of wealth and rank. Undeniably this rise could
only occur where there were great differences of social status, where
rank was a recognised institution, and where property had been amassed
in considerable quantities by some, while others went bare as lackalls.

These things have been of the very essence of civilisation (the more's
the pity), therefore _Puss in Boots_ must have been invented by a more
or less civilised mind; it could not have been invented by a man in the
condition of the Fuegians or the Digger Indians. Nay, when we consider
the stress always and everywhere laid in the story on snobbish pride and
on magnificence of attire and equipment, and on retinue, we may conclude
that _Puss in Boots_ could hardly have been imagined by men in the
middle barbarism; in the state, for example, of Iroquois, or Zulus, or
Maoris. Nor are we aware that _Puss in Boots_, in any shape, is found
among any of these peoples. Thus the area in which the origin of _Puss
in Boots_ has to be looked for is comparatively narrow.

_Puss in Boots_, again, is a story which, in all its wonderfully varying
forms, can only, we may assume, have sprung from one single mind. It is
extremely difficult to assert with confidence that any plot can only
have been invented once for all. Every new successful plot, from _Dr.
Jekyl_ to _She_, from _Vice Versa_ to _Dean Maitland_, is at once
claimed for half a dozen authors who, unluckily, did not happen to write
_She_ or _Dr. Jekyl_. But if there can be any assurance in these
matters, we may feel certain that the idea of a story, wherein a young
man is brought from poverty to the throne by aid of a match-making and
ingenious beast, could only have been invented once for all. In that
case _Puss in Boots_ is a story which spread from one centre, and was
invented by one man in a fairly civilised society. True, he used certain
hereditary and established _formulæ_; the notion of a beast that can
talk, and surprises nobody (except in the Zanzibar version) by this
accomplishment, is a notion derived from the old savage condition of the
intellect, in which beasts are on a level with, or superior to,
humanity. But we can all use these _formulæ_ now that we possess them.
Could memory of past literature be wholly wiped out, while civilisation
still endured, there would be no talking and friendly beasts in the
children's tales of the next generation, unless the children wrote them
for themselves. As Sainte-Beuve says, 'On n'inventerait plus aujourd'hui
de ces choses, si elles n'avaient été imaginées dès longtemps[56].'

If we are to get any light on the first home of the tale--and we cannot
get very much--it will be necessary to examine its different versions.
There is an extraordinary amount of variety in the incidents subordinate
to the main idea, and occasionally we find a heroine instead of a hero,
a Marquise de Carabas, not a marquis. Perhaps the best plan will be to
start with the stories near home, and to pursue puss, if possible, to
his distant original tree. First, we all know him in English
translations, made as early as 1745, if not earlier, of Perrault's
_Maître Chat, ou Chat botté_, published in 1696-7. Here his motives are
simple fun and friendliness. His master, who owns no other property,
thinks of killing and skinning puss, but the cat prefers first to make
acquaintance with the king, by aid of presents of game from an imaginary
Marquis de Carabas; then to pretend his master is drowning and has had
his clothes stolen (thereby introducing him to the king in a court suit,
borrowed from the monarch himself); next to frighten people into saying
that the Marquis is their _seigneur_; and, finally, to secure a property
for the Marquis by swallowing an ogre, whom he has induced to assume the
disguise of a mouse. This last trick is as old as Hesiod[57], where Zeus
persuades his wife to become a fly, and swallows her.

The next neighbour of the French _Puss in Boots_ in the north is found
in Sweden[58] and in Norway[59]. In the Swedish, a girl owns the cat.
They wander to a castle gate, where the cat bids the girl strip and hide
in a tree; he then goes to the castle and says that his royal mistress
has been attacked by robbers. The people of the palace attire the girl
splendidly, the prince loses his heart to her, the queen-mother lays
traps for her in vain. Nothing is so fine in the castle as in the girl's
château of Cattenburg. The prince insists on seeing that palace, the cat
frightens the peasants into saying that all the land they pass is the
girl's; finally, the cat reaches a troll's house, with pillars of gold.
The cat turns himself into a loaf of bread and holds the troll in talk
till the sun rises on him and he bursts, as trolls always do if they see
the sun. The girl succeeds to the troll's palace, and nothing is said as
to what became of the cat.

Here is even less moral than in _Puss in Boots_, for the Marquis of
Carabas, as M. Deulin says, merely lets the cat do all the tricks,
whereas the Swedish girl is his active accomplice. The change of the cat
into bread (which can talk), and the bursting of the ogre at dawn, are
very ancient ideas, whether they have been tacked later on to the
_conte_ or not. In _Lord Peter_ the heroine gives place to a hero, while
the cat drives deer to the palace, saying that they come from Lord
Peter. The cat, we are not told how, dresses Lord Peter in splendid
attire, kills a troll for him, and then, as in Madame d'Aulnoy's _White
Cat_, has its head cut off and becomes a princess. Behold how fancies
jump! All the ogre's wealth had been the princess's, before the ogre
changed her into a cat, and took her lands. Thus George Cruikshank's
moral conclusion is anticipated, while puss acts as a match-maker
indeed, but acts for herself. This form of the legend, if not immoral,
has no moral, and has been mixed up either with Madame d'Aulnoy's
_Chatte Blanche_, or with the popular traditions from which she
borrowed.

Moving south, but still keeping near France, we find _Puss in Boots_ in
Italy. The tale is told by Straparola[60]. A youngest son owns nothing
but a cat which, by presents of game, wins the favour of a king of
Bohemia. The drowning trick is then played, and the king gives the cat's
master his daughter, with plenty of money. On the bride's journey to her
new home, the cat frightens the peasants into saying all the land
belongs to his master, for whom he secures the castle of a knight dead
without heirs.

Here, once more, there is no moral.

In a popular version from Sicily[61], a fox takes the cat's place, _from
motives of gratitude_, because the man found it robbing and did not kill
it. The fox then plays the usual trick with the game, and another
familiar trick, that of leaving a few coins in a borrowed bushel measure
to give the impression that his master does not _count_, but measures
out his money. The trick of frightening the peasants follows, and
finally, an ogress who owns a castle is thrown down a well by the fox.
Then comes in the new feature: the _man is ungrateful and kills the
fox_; nevertheless he lives happy ever after.

Now, at last, we have reached the moral. A beggar on horseback will
forget his first friend: _a man will be less grateful than a beast_.

This moral declares itself, with a difference (for the ingrate is
coerced into decent behaviour), in a popular French version, taken down
from oral recitation[62].

Here, then, even among the peasantry of Perrault's own country, and as
near France as Sicily, too, we have _Puss in Boots_ with a moral: that
of human ingratitude contrasted with the gratitude of a beast. May we
conclude, then, that _Puss in Boots_ was originally invented as a kind
of parable by which this moral might be inculcated? And, if we may draw
that conclusion, where is this particular moral most likely to have been
invented, and enforced in an apologue?

As to the first of these two questions, it may be observed that the
story with the moral, and with a fox in place of a cat, is found among
the Avars, a Mongolian people of Mussulman faith, on the northern slopes
of the Caucasus. Here the man is ungrateful, but the fox, as in Sicily,
coerces him, in this case by threatening to let out the story of his
rise in life[63]. In Russia, too, a fox takes the cat's _rôle_, and the
part of the ogre is entrusted to the Serpent Uhlan, a supernatural
snake, who is burned to ashes[64].

It is now plain that the tale with the moral, whether that was the
original motive or not, is more common than the tale without the moral.
We find the moral among French, Italians, Avars, Russians; among people
of Mahommedan, Greek, and Catholic religion. Now M. Emmanuel Cosquin is
inclined to believe that the moral--the ingratitude of man contrasted
with the gratitude of beasts,--is Buddhistic. If that be so, then India
is undeniably the original cradle of _Puss in Boots_. But M. Cosquin has
been unable to find any _Puss in Boots_ in India; at least he knew none
in 1876, when he wrote on the subject in _Le Français_ (June 29, 1876).
Nor did the learned Benfey, with all his prodigious erudition, know an
Indian _Puss in Boots_[65]. Therefore the proof of this theory, that
Buddhistic India may be the real cat's cradle, is incomplete; nor does
it become more probable when we actually do discover _Puss in Boots_ in
India. For in the Indian _Puss in Boots_, just as in Perrault's, _there
is no moral at all_, and the notion of gratitude, on either the man's
side or the beast's, is not even suggested.

There could scarcely be a more disappointing discovery than this for the
school of Benfey which derives our fairy tales from Buddhism and India.
First, the tale which we are discussing certainly did not find a place
in the _Pantschatantra_, the _Hitopadesa_, or any other of the early
Indian literary collections of _Märchen_ which were translated into so
many Western languages. Next, the story does not present itself, for
long, to European students of living Indian folklore. Finally, when puss
_is_ found in India, where the moral element (if it was the original
element, and if its origin was in Buddhist fancy) should be particularly
well preserved, there is not any moral whatever.

The Indian _Puss in Boots_ is called _The Match-making Jackal_, and was
published, seven years after M. Cosquin had failed to find it, in the
Rev. Lal Behari Day's _Folk Tales of Bengal_ (Macmillan). Mr. Day, of
the Hooghly College, is a native gentleman well acquainted with European
folklore. Some of the stories in his collection were told by a Bengali
Christian woman, two by an old Brahman, three by an old barber, two by a
servant of Mr. Day's, and the rest by another old Brahman. Unluckily,
the editor does not say which tales he got from each contributor. It
might therefore be argued that _The Match-making Jackal_ was perhaps
told by the Christian woman, and that she adapted it from _Puss in
Boots_, which she might have heard told by Christians. Mr. Day will be
able to settle this question; but it must be plain to any reader of _The
Match-making Jackal_ that the story, as reported, is too essentially
Hindoo to have been 'adapted' in one generation. It is not impossible
that a literary Scandinavian might have introduced the typically Norse
touches into the Norse _Puss in Boots_, but no illiterate woman of
Bengal could have made Perrault's puss such a thoroughly Oriental jackal
as the beast in the story we are about to relate.

There was once a poor weaver whose ancestors had been wealthy men. The
weaver was all alone in the world, but a neighbouring jackal,
'remembering the grandeur of the weaver's forefathers, had compassion on
him.' This was pure sentiment on the jackal's part; his life had not
been spared, as in some European versions, by the weaver. There was no
gratitude in the case. 'I'll try to marry you,' said the jackal,
off-hand, 'to the daughter of the king of this country.' The weaver
said, 'Yes, when the sun rises in the west.' But the jackal had his
plan. He trotted off to the palace, many miles away, and on the road he
plucked quantities of the leaves of the betel plant. Then he lay down at
the entrance of the tank where the princess bathed twice a day, and
began ostentatiously chewing betel-leaves. 'Why,' said the princess,
'what a rich land this jackal must have come from. Here he is chewing
betel, a luxury that thousands of men and women among us cannot afford.'
The princess asked the jackal whence he came, and he said he was the
native of a wealthy country. 'As for our king, his palace is like the
heaven of Indra; your palace here is a miserable hovel compared to it.'
So the princess told the queen, who at once, and most naturally, asked
the jackal if his king were a bachelor. 'Certainly,' said the jackal,
'he has rejected princesses from all parts.' So the queen said _she_ had
a pretty daughter, still _zu haben_, and the jackal promised to try to
persuade his master to think of the princess. The jackal returned on his
confidential mission, telling the weaver to follow his instructions
closely. He went back to court, and suggested that his master should
come in a private manner, not in state, as his retinue would eat up the
substance of his future father-in-law. He returned and made the weaver
borrow a decent suit of clothes from the washermen. Then he made
interest with the king of the jackals, the paddy-birds, and the crows,
each of whom lent a contingent of a thousand beasts or birds of their
species. When they had all arrived within two miles of the palace, the
jackal bade them yell and cry, which they did so furiously that the king
supposed an innumerable company of people were attending his son-in-law.
He therefore implored the jackal to ask his master to come quite alone.
'My master will come alone in undress,' said the jackal; 'send a horse
for him.' This was done, and the jackal explained that his master
arrived in mean clothes that he might not abash the king by his glory
and splendour. The weaver held his tongue as commanded, but at night his
talk was of looms and beams, and the princess detected him. The jackal
explained that his philanthropic prince was establishing a colony of
weavers, and that his mind ran a good deal on this benevolent project.

Here the _Puss in Boots_ character of the tale disappears. The weaver
and the princess go home, but the jackal does _not_ cajole anyone out of
a castle and lands. He has made the match, and there he leaves it. The
princess, however, has fortunately a magical method of making gold, by
virtue of which she builds the weaver a splendid palace, and 'hospitals
were established for diseased, sick, and infirm animals,' a very Indian
touch. The king visits his daughter, is astonished at her wealth, and
the jackal says, 'Did I not tell you so?'

Here, as we said, there is no moral, or if any moral, it is the
gratitude of man, as displayed in founding hospitals for beasts, not, as
M. Cosquin says, 'l'idée toute bouddhique de l'ingratitude de l'homme
opposée à la bonté native de l'animal.' Plainly, if any moral was really
intended, it was a satire on people who seek great marriages, just as in
the story of _The Rat's Wedding_, the moral is a censure on
bargain-hunters.

The failure of the only Indian _Puss in Boots_ we know to establish a
theory of an Indian origin, does not, of course, prove a negative. We
can only say that puss certainly did not come from India to Europe by
the ordinary literary vehicles, and that, when he is found in India, he
does not preach what is called the essentially Buddhist doctrine of the
ingratitude of man and the gratitude of beasts.

There remains, however, an Eastern form of the tale, an African version,
which is of morality all compact. This is the Swahili version from
Zanzibar, and it is printed as _Sultan Darai_, in Dr. Steere's _Swahili
Tales, as told by Natives of Zanzibar_ (Bell and Daldy, London, 1870).
If a tale first arose where it is now found to exist with most moral,
with most didactic purpose, then _Puss in Boots_ is either Arab or
Negro, or a piece in which Negroes and Arabs have collaborated. For
nowhere is the _conte_ so purposeful as among the Swahilis, who are by
definition 'men of mixed Negro and Arab origin.' There may be Central
African elements in the Swahili tales, for most of them have 'sung
parts,' almost unintelligible even to the singers. 'I suppose,' says Dr.
Steere, 'they have been brought down from the interior by the slaves,
and perhaps corrupted by them as they gradually forgot their own
language.' Thus Central Africa may have contributed to the Swahili
stories, but the Swahili _Puss in Boots_, as it at present exists, has
been deeply modified by Mussulman ideas.

_Sultan Darai_, the Swahili _Puss in Boots_, really contains two tales.
The first is about a wicked step-mother; the second begins when the
hero, losing his wife and other kinsfolk, takes to vicious courses, and
becomes so poor that he passes his time scratching for grains of millet
on the common dustheap. While thus scratching he finds a piece of money,
with which he buys a gazelle. The gazelle has pity on him, and startles
him by saying so: 'Almighty God is able to do all things, to make me to
speak, and others more than I.' The story comes, therefore, through
narrators who marvel, as in the fairy world nobody does marvel, at the
miracle of a speaking beast.

The gazelle, intent on helping the man, finds a splendid diamond, which
he takes to the sultan, just as puss took the game, as 'a present from
Sultan Darai.' The sultan is much pleased; the gazelle proposes that he
shall give his daughter to Sultan Darai, and then comes the old trick of
pretending the master has been stripped by robbers, 'even to his
loin-cloth.' The gazelle carries fine raiment to his master, and, as in
the French popular and traditional form, bids him speak as little as may
be. The marriage is celebrated, and the gazelle goes off, and kills a
great seven-headed snake, which, as in Russia, is the owner of a rich
house. The snake, as he travels, is accompanied (as in the Kaffir story
of _Five Heads_) by a storm of wind, like that which used to shake the
'medicine lodges' of the North American Indians, puzzling the
missionaries. The snake, like the ogre in all _Hop o' My Thumb_ tales,
smells out the gazelle, but is defeated by that victorious animal. The
gazelle brings home his master, Sultan Darai, and the Princess to the
snake's house, where they live in great wealth and comfort.

Now comes in the moral: the gazelle falls sick, Sultan Darai refuses to
see it, orders coarse food to be offered it; treats his poor benefactor,
in short, with all the arrogant contempt of an ungrateful beggar
suddenly enriched. As the ill-used cat says in the _Pentamerone_--

  De riche appauvri Dieu te gard'
  Et de croquant passé richard!

Finally the gazelle dies of sorrow, and Sultan Darai dreams that he is
scratching on his old dustheap. He wakens and finds himself there, as
naked and wretched as ever, while his wife is wafted to her father's
house at home.

The moral is obvious, and the story is told in a very touching manner,
moreover all the world takes the side of the gazelle, and it is _mourned
with a public funeral_.

Here, then, in Zanzibar we have decidedly the most serious and
purposeful form of _Puss in Boots_. It is worth noting that the animal
hero is _not_ the Rabbit who is the usual hero in Zanzibar as he is in
Uncle Remus's tales. It is also worth noticing that a certain tribe of
Southern Arabians do, as a matter of fact, honour all dead gazelles with
seven days of public mourning. 'Ibn al-Moghâwir,' says Prof.
Robertson-Smith, in _Kinship in Early Arabia_ (p. 195), 'speaks of a
South Arab tribe called Beni Hârith or Acârib, among whom if a dead
gazelle was found, it was solemnly buried, and the whole tribe mourned
for it seven days.... The gazelle supplies a name to a clan of the Azd,
the Zabyân.' Prof. Robertson-Smith adds (p. 204), 'And so when we find a
whole clan mourning over a dead gazelle, we can hardly but conclude that
when this habit was first formed, they thought that they were of the
gazelle-stock' or Totem kindred.

It is quite possible that all these things are mere coincidences.
Certainly we shall not argue, because the most moral form of _Puss in
Boots_ gives us a gazelle in place of a cat, and because a certain Arab
clan mourns gazelles, while the gazelle hero is found in the story of a
half-Arab race, that, therefore, the Swahili gazelle story is the
original form of _Puss in Boots_, and that from Arabia the tale has been
carried into Russia, Scandinavia, Italy, India, and France, often
leaving its moral behind it, and always exchanging its gazelle for some
other beast-hero.

This kind of reasoning is only too common, when the object is to show
that India was the birthplace of any widely diffused popular fiction. In
India, people argue, this or that tale has a moral. Among Celts and
Kamschatkans it has _no_ moral. But certain stories did undeniably come
from India in literary works, like the stories of Sindibad. Therefore
this or that story also came from India, dropping its moral on the way.
Did we like this sort of syllogism, we might boldly assert that _Puss
in_ _Boots_ was originally a heroic myth of an Arab tribe with a gazelle
for Totem. But we like not this kind of syllogism. The purpose of this
study of _Puss in Boots_ is to show that, even when a tale has probably
been invented but once, in one place, and has thence spread over a great
part of the world, the difficulty of finding the original centre is
perhaps insuperable. At any time a fresh discovery may be made. Puss
_may_ turn up in some hitherto unread manuscript of an old missionary
among Mexicans or Peruvians[66].

[Footnote 52: George Cruikshank had also turned _Hop o' My Thumb_ and
_Cinderella_ into temperance tracts. See Cruikshank's _Fairy Library_,
G. Bell and Sons.]

[Footnote 53: The French version is in M. Charles Deulin's _Contes du
Roi Gambrinus_. The German (Grimm, 64) omits the story of the exchanges,
but ends like _Jean Gogué_. The Zulu is in Dr. Callaway's
_Inzinganekwane_, pp. 38-40.]

[Footnote 54: _Wide-awake Stories._ A collection of tales told by little
children, between sunset and sunrise, in the Punjaub and Kashmir. Steel
and Temple, London, 1884, p. 26.]

[Footnote 55: Andree, _Die Anthropophagie_, 'Überlebsel im
Volksglauben.' Leipzig, 1887.]

[Footnote 56: _Causeries du Lundi_, December 29, 1851.]

[Footnote 57: _Schol. ad. Theog._ 885.]

[Footnote 58: Thorpe's _Palace with Pillars of Gold_.]

[Footnote 59: Dasent's _Lord Peter_.]

[Footnote 60: _Piacevoli Notti_, xi. 1, Venice, 1562. Crane's _Italian
Popular Tales_, p. 348.]

[Footnote 61: Pitré, No. 188; Crane, p. 127. Gonzenbach, 65, _Conte
Piro_. In Gonzenbach, the man does not kill the fox, which pretends to
be dead, and is bilked of its promised reward, a grand funeral.]

[Footnote 62: Lou Compaire Gatet, 'Father Cat,' _Revue des Langues
Romanes_, iii. 396. See Deulin, _Contes de Ma Mère L'Oye_, p. 205.]

[Footnote 63: _Boukoutchi Khan_, translated into German by Schiefner.
_Mémoires de l'Académie de St. Pétersbourg_, 1873. With Dr. Köhler's
Notes.]

[Footnote 64: Gubernatis. _Zoological Mythology_, ii. 136. Quoting
Afanassieff, iv. 11. Compare a similar snake in Swahili.]

[Footnote 65: _Pantschatantra_, i. 222.]

[Footnote 66: The work of M. Cosquin's referred to throughout is his
valuable _Contes de Lorraine_, Paris, 1886. A crowd of _Puss in Boots_
stories are referred to by Dr. Köhler in Gonzenbach's _Sicilianische
Märchen_, ii. 243 (Leipzig, 1870). They are Finnish, Bulgarian, Russian,
and South Siberian. The Swahili and Hindu versions appear to have been
unknown, in 1870, to Dr. Köhler. In 1883, Mr. Ralston, who takes the
Buddhist side, did not know the Indian version (_Nineteenth Century_,
Jan. 1883).]


  LES FÉES.

  _Toads and Diamonds._

The origin of this little story is so manifestly moral, that there is
little need to discuss it. A good younger sister behaves kindly to a
poor old woman, who, being a fairy, turns all her words into flowers and
diamonds. The wicked elder sister treats the fairy with despite: _her_
words become toads and serpents, and the younger marries a king's son.

The preference shown to the youngest child is discussed in the note on
Cinderella. M. Deulin asks whether _Toads and Pearls_ is connected with
the legend of Latona (Leto) and the peasants whom she changed into
frogs, for refusing to allow her to drink[67]. Latona really wished to
bathe her children, and the two narratives have probably no connection,
though rudeness is punished in both. Nor is there a closer connection
with the tales in which tears (like the tears of Wainamoinen in the
_Kalewala_) change into pearls. It is an obvious criticism that the
elder girl should have met the fairy first; she was not likely to behave
so rudely when she knew that politeness would be rewarded. The natural
order of events occurs in Grimm's _Golden Goose_ (64), where the eldest
and the second son refuse to let the old man taste their cake and wine.
Here, as in a tale brought by M. Deulin from French Flanders, the polite
youngest son, by virtue of a Golden Goose, makes a very serious princess
laugh, and wins her for his wife. Turning on a similar moral conception
Grimm's _Mother Holle_ (24) is infinitely better than _Les Fées_. The
younger daughter drops her shuttle down a well; she is sent after it,
and reaches a land where apples speak and say, 'Shake us, we are all
ripe.' She does all she is asked to do, and makes Mother Holle's
feather-bed so well that the feathers (snow-flakes) fly about the world.
She goes home covered with golden wages, and her elder sister follows
her, but not her example. She insults the apples, is lazy at Mother
Holle's, and is sent home covered with pitch. Grimm gives many variants.
Mlle. L'Heritier amplifies the tale in her _Bigarrures_ (1696). The
story begins to be more exciting, when it is combined, as commonly
happens, with that of the substituted bride. It is odd enough that the
Kaffirs have the incident of the good and bad girl, the bad girl laughs
at the trees, as in Grimm's she mocks the apples (Theal, _Kaffir
Folklore_, p. 49). This tale (in which there is no miracle of uttering
toads or pearls) diverges into that of the _Snake Husband_, a rude
_Beauty and the Beast_. The Zulus again have the story of the
substituted bride ('Ukcombekcantsini,' Callaway's _Nursery Tales of the
Zulus_, Natal, 1868). The idea recurs in Theal's Kaffir Collection (p.
136); in both cases the substituted bride is a beast. In Scotland the
story of the _Black Bull o' Norroway_ contains the incident of the
substituted bride. The Kaffirs, in _The Wonderful Horns_, have a large
part of that story, but without the substituted bride, who, in Europe,
occasionally attaches herself as a sequel to _Toads and Diamonds_. This
is illustrated especially in Grimm's _Three Dwarfs in the Wood_ (13),
where the good girl's speech is made literally golden. The bad girl, who
speaks toads, marries the king's son who loves the good girl. Fragments
of verse, in which the good girl tries to warn her husband, resemble
those in the _Black Bull o' Norroway_. The tale is complicated by the
metamorphosis of the true bride (no great change her lover would say)
into 'a little duck.' She regains her shape when a sword is swung over
her. The bad girl is tortured like Regulus. This is _Bushy-bride_ in
Dasent's _Tales from the Norse_.

There seems to be no reason why the adventure of the good and bad
sisters should merge in the formula of the substituted bride, more than
in the adventure of the princess accused of bearing bestial children, or
in any other. Probably Perrault felt this, and, having made his moral
point, was content to do without the sequel.

_Les Fées_ is interesting then, first, as an example of a moral idea
illustrated in tales even in South Africa, and, secondly (in its longer
and more usual form), as an example of the manner in which any story may
glide into any other. All the incidents of popular tales, like the bits
of glass in a kaleidoscope, may be shaken into a practically limitless
number of combinations.

[Footnote 67: Antoninus Liberalis, xxxv.]


  CENDRILLON.

  _Cinderella._

The story of Cinderella (_Cendrillon_, _Cucendron_, _Cendreusette_,
_Sainte Rosette_) is one of the most curious in the history of
_Märchen_. Here we can distinctly see how the taste and judgment of
Perrault altered an old and barbarous detail, and there, perhaps, we
find the remains of a very ancient custom.

There are two points in _Cinderella_, and her cousin _Peau d'Ane_,
particularly worth notice. First, there is the process by which the
agency of a _Fairy Godmother_ has been substituted for that of a
_friendly beast_, usually a connection by blood-kindred of the hero or
heroine. Secondly, there is the favouritism shown, in many versions, to
the _youngest child_, and the custom which allots to this child a place
by the hearth or in the cinders (_Cucendron_).

Taking the first incident, the appearance in Perrault of a Fairy
Godmother in place of a _friendly beast_, we may remark that this kind
of change is always characteristic of the promotion of a story. Just as
Indian 'aboriginal' tribes cashier their beast-ancestors ('Totems') in
favour of a human ancestor of a similar name, when they rise in
civilisation, so the _rôles_ which are filled by beasts in savage
_Märchen_ come to be assigned to men and women in the _contes_ of more
cultivated people[68]. In Cinderella, however, the friendly beast holds
its own more or less in nearly all European versions, except in those
actually derived from Perrault. In every shape of the story known to us,
the beast is a _domesticated animal_. Thus it will not be surprising if
no native version is found in America, where animals, except dogs, were
scarcely domesticated at all before the arrival of Europeans.

In examining the incident of the friendly and protecting beast, it may
be well to begin with a remote and barbarous version, that of the
Kaffirs. Here, as in other cases, we may find one situation in a
familiar story divorced from those which, as a general rule, are in its
company. Theorists may argue either that the Kaffirs borrowed from
Europeans one or two incidents out of a popular form of _Cinderella_, or
that they happen to make use of an opinion common to most early peoples,
the belief, namely, in the superhuman powers of friendly
beast-protectors. As to borrowing, Europeans and Kaffirs have been in
contact, though not very closely, for two hundred years. No one,
however, would explain the Kaffir custom of daubing the body with white
clay, in the initiatory rites, as derived from the similar practice of
the ancient Greeks[69]. Among the neighbouring Zulus, Dr. Callaway found
that _Märchen_ were the special property of the most conservative
class,--the old women. 'It is not common to meet with a man who is
willing to speak of them in any other way than as something which he has
some dim recollection of having heard his grandmother relate[70].'
Whether the traditional lore of savage grandmothers is likely to have
been borrowed from Dutch or English settlers is a question that may be
left to the reader.

The tale in which the friendly beast of European folklore occurs among
the Kaffirs is _The Wonderful Horns_[71]. As among the Santals (an
'aboriginal' hilltribe of India) we have a hero, not a heroine. 'There
was once a boy whose mother that bore him was dead, and who was
ill-treated by his other mothers,' the Kaffirs being polygamous. He rode
off on an ox given him by his father. The ox fought a bull and won. Food
was supplied out of his right horn, and the 'leavings' (as in the _Black
Bull o'Norroway_) were put into the left horn. In another fight the ox
was killed, but his horns continued to be a magical source of supplies.
A new mantle and handsome ornaments came out of them, and by virtue of
this fairy splendour he won and wedded a very beautiful girl.

Here, it may be said, there is nothing of _Cendrillon_, except that rich
garments, miraculously furnished, help to make a marriage; and that the
person thus aided was the victim of a stepmother. No doubt this is not
much, but we might sum up _Cendrillon_ thus. The victim of a stepmother
makes a great marriage by dint of goodly garments supernaturally
provided.

In _Cendrillon_ the _recognition_ (anagnôrisis) makes a great part of
the interest. There is no anagnôrisis in the Kaffir legend, which is
very short, being either truncated or undeveloped.

Let us now turn to the Santals, a remote and shy non-Aryan hill-tribe of
India. Here we find the anagnôrisis, but in a form not only
disappointing but almost cynical[72].

In the Santal story we have the cruel Stepmother, the hero,--not a
heroine, but a boy,--the protecting and friendly Cow, the attempt to
kill the Cow, the Flight, the great good-fortune of the hero, the
Princess who falls in love with a lock of his hair, which is to play the
part of Cinderella's glass slipper in the anagnôrisis, and, finally, a
cynically devised accident, by which the beauty of the hair is
destroyed, and the hero's chance of pleasing the princess perishes. It
will be noticed that the use of a lock of hair floating down a river, to
be fallen in love with and help the _dénouement_, is found, first, in
the Egyptian _conte_ of the _Two Brothers_, written down in the reign of
Ramses II., fourteen hundred years before our era.

In that story, too, the hero has a friendly cow, which warns him when he
is in danger of being murdered. But the Egyptian story has no other
connection with _Cendrillon_[73]. The device of a floating lock of hair
is not uncommon in Bengali _Märchen_.

From the Santals let us turn to another race, not so remote, but still
non-Aryan, the Finns[74]. That the Santals borrow _Märchen_ from their
Hinduised aboriginal neighbours is not certain, but is perfectly
possible and even probable. Though some theorists have denied that races
borrow nursery tales from each other, it is certain that Lönnrot,
writing to Schiefner in 1855, mentions a Finnish fisher who, meeting
Russian and Swedish fishers, 'swopped stories' with them when stormy
weather made it impossible to put to sea[75]. No doubt similar
borrowings have always been going on when the peasantry on the frontiers
met their neighbours, and where Kaffirs have taken Hottentot wives, or
Sidonians have carried off Greek children as captives, in fact, all
through the national and tribal meetings of the world[76].

_The Wonderful Birch_ (Emmy Schreck, ix.) is a form of _Cinderella_ from
Russian Carelia. The story has a singularly dramatic and original
opening. A man and his wife had but one daughter, and one Sheep. The
Sheep wandered away, the woman sought him in the woods, and she met a
witchwife. The witchwife turned the woman into the semblance of the
Sheep, and herself took the semblance of the woman. She went to the
woman's house, where the husband thought he was welcoming his own wife
and the sheep that was lost. The new and strange stepmother demanded the
death of the Sheep, which was the real mother of the heroine. Warned by
the Sheep, a black sheep, the daughter did not taste of her flesh, but
gathered and buried the bones and fragments. Thence grew a beautiful
birch tree. The man and the witchwife went to court, the witchwife
leaving the girl to accomplish impossible tasks. The voice of the dead
mother from the grave below the birch bade the girl break a twig from
the tree, and therewith accomplish the tasks. Then out of the earth came
beautiful raiment (as in _Peau d'Ane_), and the girl dressed, and went
to court. The Prince falls in love with her, and detects her by means of
her ring, which takes the part of the slipper. Then comes in the
frequent formula of a false bride substituted by the witchwife, a number
of trials, and the punishment of the witch.

Here, then, the friendly beast is but the Mother surviving in two
shapes, first as a sheep, then as a tree, exactly the idea of the
ancient Egyptian story of the _Two Brothers_, where Bitiou first becomes
a bull, and then a persea tree[77]. In Finnish the Cinderella plot is
fully developed. A similar tale, still with the beast in place of the
Fairy Godmother, is quoted by Mr. Ralston from the Servian (_Vuk
Karajich_, No. 32). Three maidens were spinning near a cleft in the
ground, when an old man warned them not to let their spindles fall into
the cleft, or their mother would be changed into a cow. Mara's spindle
fell in, and the mother instantly shared the fate of Io. Mara tended the
cow that had been her mother lovingly, but the father married again, and
the new wife drove Mara to dwell among the cinders (_pepel_), hence she
was called _Pepelluga_, cinderwench[78]. The cruel Servian stepmother
had the cow slain, but not before it had warned Mara to eat none of the
kindred flesh[79], and to bury the bones in the ashes of the hearth.
From these bones sprang two white doves, which supplied Mara with
splendid raiment, and, finally, won for her the hand of the prince,
after the usual incidents of the lost slipper, the attempt to substitute
the stepmother's ugly daughter, and the warning of the fowls, 'Ki erike,
the right maiden is under the trough.'

In a modern Greek variant (Hahn, ii.), the Mother (not in vaccine form)
is eaten by her daughters, except the youngest, who refuses the hideous
meal. The dead woman magically aids the youngest from her tomb, and the
rest follows as usual, the slipper playing its accustomed part.

In Gaelic a persecuted stepdaughter is aided by a Ram. The Ram is
killed, his bones are buried by his _protégée_, he comes to life again,
but is lame, for his bones were not all collected, and he plays the part
of Fairy Godmother[80].

Turning from the Gaelic to the Lowland Scotch, we find _Rashin Coatie_
as a name under which either _Peau d'Ane_ or _Cendrillon_ may be
narrated. We discovered Cendrillon as _Rashin Coatie_, in
Morayshire[81]. Here a Queen does not become a _cow_, indeed, but dies,
and leaves to her daughter a _Red Calf_, which aids her, till it is
slain by a cruel stepmother.

     The dead calfy said

           _Tak me up, bane by bane
          And pit me aneth yon grey stane,_

     and whatever you want, come and seek it frae me, and I will
     give you it.

The usual adventures of Cinderella ensue, the birds denouncing the False
Bride, whose foot is pinched to make it fit the 'beautiful satin
slipper' of the heroine.

In most of these versions the heroine is aided by a beast, and even when
that beast is dead, it continues helpful, in one case actually coming to
life again, like the ox in the South African _Märchen_[82].

In all these thoroughly popular and traditional tales, the supernatural
machinery varies much from that of Perrault, who found _Peau d'Ane_
'difficile à croire.' But, in all the wilder tales, the machinery is
exactly what we note in the myths and actual beliefs of the lower races.
_They_ do not shrink from the conception of a mother who becomes a cow
(like Io), nor of a cow (as in the case of Heitsi Eibib among the
Hottentots), who becomes the mother of human progeny. It is not unlikely
that the Scotch mother, in _Rashin Coatie_, who bequeathes to her
daughter a wonder-working calf (a cow in Sicily, Pitré, 41), is a
modification of an idea like that of the cannibal Servian variant[83].
Then the _Mouton_ of Madame d'Aulnoy seems like a courtly survival of
the Celtic _Sharp Grey Sheep_ mixed with the _donnée_ of _Beauty and the
Beast_[84]. The notion of helpful animals makes all the 'Manitou'
element in Red Indian religion, and is common in Australia. The helpful
calf, or sheep, bequeathed by the dying mother, reminds one of the
equally helpful, but golden Ram, which aids Phrixus and Helle against
their stepmother, after the death or deposition of their mother Nephele.
This Ram also could speak,--

    alla kai audên
  andromeên proeêke kakon teras[85].

This recalls not only the Celtic _Sharp Grey Sheep_, but also Madame
d'Aulnoy and her princess, 'je vous avoue que je ne suis pas accoutumée
à vivre avec les moutons qui parlent.'

The older rural and popular forms of _Cinderella_, then, are full of
machinery not only supernatural, but supernatural in a wild way: women
become beasts, mothers are devoured by daughters (a thing that even Zulu
fancy boggles at), life of beast or man is a separable thing, capable of
continuing in lower forms. Thus we may conjecture that the ass's skin
worn by _Peau d'Ane_ was originally the hide of a beast helpful to her,
even connected, maybe, with her dead mother, and that the ass, like the
cow, the calf, the sheep, and the doves of _Märchen_, befriended her,
and clothed her in wondrous raiment.

For all these antique marvels Perrault, or the comparatively civilised
tradition which Perrault followed, substituted, in _Peau d'Ane_, as in
_Cendrillon_, the Christian conception of a Fairy Godmother. This
substitute for more ancient and less _speciosa miracula_ is confined to
Perrault's tales, and occurs nowhere in purely traditional _Märchen_. In
these as in the widely diffused ballad of the _Re-arisen Mother_--

  'Twas late in the night and the bairns grat,
  The Mother below the mouls heard that,--

the idea of a Mother's love surviving her death inspires the legend,
and, despite savage details, produces a touching effect (Ralston,
_Nineteenth Century_, Nov. 1879, p. 839).

Another notable point in _Cinderella_ is the preference shown, as usual,
to the youngest child. Cinderella, to be sure, is a stepchild, and
therefore interesting; but it is no great stretch of conjecture to infer
that she may have originally been only the youngest child of the house.
The nickname which connects her with the fireside and the ashes is also
given, in one form or another, to the youngest son (Sir George Dasent,
for some reason, calls him 'Boots') in Scandinavian tales. Cinderella,
like the youngest son, is taunted with sitting in the ashes of the
hearth. This notion declares itself in the names Cucendron,
Aschenpüttel, Ventafochs, Pepelluga, Cernushka[86], all of them titles
implying blackness, chiefly from contact with cinders. It has frequently
been suggested that the success of the youngest child in fairy tales is
a trace of the ideas which prevailed when _Jüngsten-Recht_,
'Junior-Right' or Borough English, was a prevalent custom of
inheritance[87]. The invisible Bridegroom, of the Zulu _Märchen_, is in
hiding under a snake's skin, because he was the youngest, and his
jealous brethren meant to kill him, for he would be the heir. It was
therefore the purpose of his brethren to slay the young child in the
traditional Zulu way, that is, to avoid the shedding of 'kindred blood'
by putting a clod of earth in his mouth. Bishop Callaway gives the
parallel Hawaian case of Waikelenuiaiku. The Polynesian case of Hatupati
is also adduced. In Grimm's _Golden Bird_ the jealousy is provoked, not
by the legal rights of the youngest, but by his skill and luck. The idea
of fraternal jealousy, with the 'nice opening for a young man,' which it
discovered (like Joseph's brethren) in a pit, occurs in Peruvian myth as
reported by Cieza de Leon (_Chronicles of the Yncas_, Second Part). The
diffusion of _Jüngsten-Recht_, or _Maineté_, the inheritance by the
youngest, has been found by Mr. Elton among Ugrians, in Hungary, in
Slavonic communities, in Central Asia, on the confines of China, in the
mountains of Arracan, in Friesland, in Germany, in Celtic countries. In
Scandinavia Liebrecht adduces the Edda, '_der jüngste Sohn Jarl's der
erste König ist_.' Albericus Trium Fontium mentions Prester John, 'qui
cum fratrum suorum minimus esset, omnibus praepositus est.' In Hesiod we
meet _droit de juveignerie_, as he makes Zeus the _youngest_ of the
Cronidae, while Homer, making Zeus the eldest, is all for primogeniture
(Elton, _Origins of English History_, ch. viii. Liebrecht, _Zur
Volkskunde_).

The authorities quoted raise a presumption that _Jüngsten-Recht_, an old
and widely diffused law, might have left a trace on myth and _Märchen_.
If _Jüngsten-Recht_ were yielding place to primogeniture, if the elders
were using their natural influence to secure advantages, then the
youngest child, still heir by waning custom, would doubtless suffer a
good deal of persecution. It may have been in this condition of affairs
that the myths of the brilliant triumph of the rightful but despised
heir, Cinderella, or Boots, were developed.

On the other hand, it is obvious that the necessities of fiction demand
examples of _failure_ in the adventures, to heighten the effect of the
final success. Now the failures might have begun with the youngest, and
the eldest might be the successful hero. But that would have reversed
the natural law by which the eldest goes first out into danger.
Moreover, the nursery audience of a _conte de nourrice_ is not
prejudiced in favour of the Big but of the Little Brother.

These simple facts of everyday life, rather than some ancient custom of
inheritance, may be the cause of the favouritism always shown to the
youngest son or daughter. (Compare Ralston, _Russian Folk Tales_, p. 81.
The idea of jealousy of the youngest brother, mixed up with a
miscellaneous assortment of _motifs_ of folk tales, occurs in
_Katha-sarit-sagara_, ch. xxxix.)

Against the notion that the successful youngest son or daughter of the
_contes_ is a descendant of the youngest child who is heir by _droit de
juveignerie_, it has been urged that the hero, if the heir, would 'not
start from the dust-bin and the coal-hole.' But if his heirship were
slipping from him, as has been suggested, the ashes of the hearth are
just what he _would_ start from. The 'coal-hole,' of course, is a modern
innovation. The hearth is the recognised legal position of the youngest
child in Gavel-kind. 'Et la mesuage seit autreci entre eux departi, mes
le ASTRE demorra al puné (ou al punée)[88].' In short, 'the Hearth-place
shall belong to the youngest,' and as far as forty feet round it. After
that the eldest has the first choice, and the others in succession
according to age. The Custumal of Kent of the thirteenth century is the
authority.

These rules of inheritance show, at least (and perhaps at most), a
curious coincidence between the tales which describe the youngest child
as always busy with the hearth, and the custom which bequeaths the
hearth (_astre_) to the youngest child. To _prove_ anything it would be
desirable to show that this rule of Gavel-kind once prevailed in all the
countries where the name of the heroine corresponds in meaning to
_Cendrillon_.

The attention of mythologists has long been fixed on the _slipper_ of
Cinderella. There seems no great mystery in the Prince's proposal to
marry the woman who could wear the tiny _mule_. It corresponds to the
advantages which, when the hero is a man, attend him who can bend the
bow, lift the stone, draw the sword, or the like. In a woman's case it
is beauty, in a man's strength, that is to be tested. Whether the
slipper were of _verre_ or of _vair_ is a matter of no moment. The
slipper is of red satin in Madame d'Aulnoy's _Finette Cendron_, and of
satin in _Rashin Coatie_. The Egyptian king, in Strabo and Ælian, merely
concluded that the loser of the slipper must be a pretty woman, because
she certainly had a pretty foot. The test of fitting the owner recurs in
_Peau d'Ane_, where a ring, not a slipper, is the object, as in the
Finnish _Wonderful Birch tree_.

M. de Gubernatis takes a different view of Cinderella's slipper. The
Dawn, it appears, in the Rig Veda is said to leave no footsteps behind
her (_apad_). This naturally identifies her with Cinderella, who not
only leaves footsteps, probably, but one of her slippers. M. de
Gubernatis reasons that _apad_ 'may mean, not only she who has no feet,
but also she who has no footsteps ... or again, she who has no slippers,
the aurora having, as it appears, lost them.... The legend of the lost
slipper ... seems to me to repose entirely upon the double meaning of
the word _apad_, _i.e._ who has no foot, or what is the measure of the
foot, which may be either the footstep or the slipper....' (_Zoolog.
Myth._ i. 31). M. de Gubernatis adds that 'Cinderella, when she loses
the slipper, is overtaken by the prince bridegroom.' The point of the
whole story lies in this, of course, that she is _not_ overtaken. Had
she been overtaken, there would have been no need for the trial with the
slipper (_op. cit._ i. 161). M. de Gubernatis, in this passage, makes
the overtaking of Cinderella serve his purpose as proof; on p. 31 he
derives part of his proof from the statement (correct this time) that
Cinderella is _not_ overtaken, 'because a chariot bears her away.'
Another argument is that the dusky Cinderella is only brilliantly clad
'in the Prince's ball-room, or in church, in candle-light, and near the
Prince,--the aurora is beautiful only when the sun is near.' Is the sun
the candle-light, and is the Prince also the sun? If a lady is only
_belle à la chandelle_, what has the Dawn to do with that?

M. André Lefèvre calls M. de Gubernatis's theory _quelque peu
aventureuse_ (_Les Contes de Charles Perrault_, p. lxxiv), and this
cannot be thought a severe criticism. If we supposed the story to have
arisen out of an epithet of Dawn, in Sanskrit, the other incidents of
the tale, and their combination into a fairly definite plot, and the
wide diffusion of that plot among peoples whose ancestors assuredly
never spoke Sanskrit, would all need explanation.

In Perrault's _Cinderella_, we have not the adventure of the False or
Substituted Bride, which usually swells out this and many other
_contes_, and which, indeed, is apparently brought in by popular
_conteurs_, whenever the tale is a little short. Thus it frequently
winds up the story which Perrault gives so briefly as _Les Fées_. Among
the Zulus[89], the Birds of the Thorn country warn the bridegroom that
he has the wrong girl,--she is a beast (_mbulu_) in Zululand. The birds
give the warning in _Rashin Coatie_[90], and birds take the same part in
Swedish, Russian, German, but a dog plays the _rôle_ in Breton (Reinhold
Köhler, _op. cit._ p. 373). In a song of Fauriel's _Chansons Romaiques_
the birds warn the girl that she is riding with a corpse. Birds give the
warning in Gaelic (Campbell, No. 14).

Perrault did more than suppress the formula of the False Bride. By an
artistic use of his Fairy Godmother he gave Cinderella her excellent
reason for leaving the ball, not because _cupit ipsa videri_, but in
obedience to the fairy dame. He made Cinderella forgive her stepsisters,
and get them good marriages, in place of punishing them, as even Psyche
does so treacherously in Apuleius, and as the wild justice of folk tales
usually determines their doom. An Italian Cinderella breaks her
stepmother's neck with the lid of a chest. But Cendrillon 'douce et
bonne au début reste jusqu'à la fin douce et bonne' (Deulin, _Contes de
Ma Mère l'Oye_, p. 286). These are examples of Perrault's refined way of
treating the old tales. But in his own country there survives a version
of _Cendrillon_ in which a _Blue Bull_, not a Fairy Godmother, helps the
heroine. From the ear of the Bull, as from his horn in Kaffir lore, the
heroine draws her supplies. She is Jaquette de Bois, and reminds us of
Katie Wooden cloak. Her mother is dead, but the Bull is not said to have
been the mother in bestial form. (Sébillot, _Contes Pop. de la Haute
Bretagne_, Charpentier, Paris, 1880, p. 15). In these versions the
formula of _Cendrillon_ shifts into that of _The Black Bull o'
Norroway_.

[Footnote 68: H. H. Risley, _Asiatic Quarterly_, Number III. 'Primitive
Marriage in Bengal.']

[Footnote 69: Demosth. _De Corona_, 313, Harpocration, apomattein.
Theal, _Kaffir Folk Lore_, p. 22.]

[Footnote 70: _Izinganekwane_, p. 1.]

[Footnote 71: Theal, p. 158.]

[Footnote 72: _Indian Evangelical Review_, Oct. 1886. The collector is
Mr. A. Campbell.]

[Footnote 73: Maspero, _Contes Egyptiens_, p. 4.]

[Footnote 74: _Finnische Märchen_, übersetzt von Emmy Schreck. Weimar,
1887.]

[Footnote 75: Gustav Meyer, _op. cit._ p. xix.]

[Footnote 76: Theal, _op. cit._ p. 3.]

[Footnote 77: Compare the revived Ox. Callaway, _Zulu Nursery Tales_, p.
230; The _Edda_, Mallet, p. 436; _South African Folk Lore Journal_,
March, 1880; Aschenpüttel (The Dove and the Hazel tree), Grimm, 21.]

[Footnote 78: In the Catalan version _Ventafochs_, fire-lighter, Italian
_Cenerentola_. Deulin _Contes de Ma Mère l'Oye_, pp. 265, 266. In Emmy
Schreck the Finnish girl is _Aschenbrödel_, and foul with ashes.]

[Footnote 79: Exophagy.]

[Footnote 80: This is the _Mouton_ of Madame D'Aulnoy, but _he_ is a
prodigiously courtly creature, and becomes the _Beast_ who half dies for
love and is revived by a kiss. 'Un joli Mouton, brebis doux, bien
caressant, ne laisse pas de plaire, surtout quand on scait qu'il est
roi, et que la métamorphose doit finir.' But the heroine came too late,
and the gallant _Mouton_ expired.]

[Footnote 81: _Revue Celtique_, vol. iii. p. 365.]

[Footnote 82: In the Scandinavian _Katie Wooden cloak_ the buried bull
does all for Katie that the Ram, or Cow, or Calf, or Fairy Godmother
does for the other Cinderellas.]

[Footnote 83: Herr Köhler quotes M. Luzel's _Chat Noir_, a Breton tale,
in which a stepmother kills a cow that befriends Yvonne. Within the dead
cow were found two golden slippers. Then comes in the formula of the
False Bride (_Rev. Celtique_, 1870, p. 373).]

[Footnote 84: Among the Basutos this happens in 'The Murder of
Maciloniane.' Casalis, p. 309: 'The bird was the heart of
Maciloniane.']

[Footnote 85: Apoll. Rhod. i. 256. The story of Athamas is an ingenious
medley of _Märchen_, including, as will be shown, part of _Hop o' my
Thumb_.]

[Footnote 86: Gubernatis, _Zoolog. Myth._ ii. 5.]

[Footnote 87: A Zulu tale in Callaway, pp. 64, 65, is proof that this
was once the Zulu custom.]

[Footnote 88: Elton, _op. cit._ p. 190.]

[Footnote 89: Callaway, p. 121.]

[Footnote 90: _Revue Celtique_, Jan., Nov. 1878, p. 366.]


  RIQUET À LA HOUPPE.

  _Riquet of the Tuft._

Of all Perrault's tales _Riquet_ is the least popular. Compared with the
stories of Madlle. L'Heritier or of the Comtesse de Murat, even _Riquet_
is short and simple. But it could hardly be told by a nurse, and it
would not greatly interest a child. We want to know what became of the
plain but lively sister, and she drops out of the narrative unnoticed.
The touch of the traditional and popular manner in the story is the love
of a woman redeeming the ugliness of a man. In one shape or another,
from the Kaffir _Bird who made Milk_, or _Five Heads_, to what was
probably the original form of _Cupid and Psyche_, this is the
fundamental notion of _Beauty and the Beast_[91]. But Perrault hints
that the miracle was purely 'subjective.' 'Some say that the Princess,
reflecting on the perseverance of her lover, and all his good qualities,
ceased to see that his body was deformed, and his face ugly.' There is
therefore little excuse for examining here the legends of ladies, or
lords, who marry a Tick (in Portugal), a Frog (in Scotland and India), a
Beaver (in North America), a Pumpkin (in Wallachia), an Iron Stove (in
Germany), a Serpent (in Zululand), and so forth. These tales are
usually, perhaps, of moral origin, and convey the lesson that no magic
can resist kindness. The strange husbands or wives are enchanted into an
evil shape, till they meet a lover who will not disdain them. Moral,
don't disdain anybody. Some have entertained angels unawares. But this
apologue could only have been invented when there was a general belief
in powers of enchantment and metamorphosis, a belief always more
powerful in proportion to the low culture of the people who entertain
it. In the Kaffir tale, where the girl disenchants the Crocodile by
_licking_ him (kissing, perhaps, being unfamiliar), the man who comes
out of the crocodile skin merely says that the girl's 'power' (her
native magical force) is greater than that of 'the enemies of his
father's house,' who had enchanted him (Theal, _The Bird who made
Milk_). This idea may and does exist apart from the notion, which so
commonly accompanies it, of a taboo, or prohibition on freedom of
intercourse between the lover and the lady, either of whom has been
disenchanted by the other.

If the original and popular basis of this kind of story was moral, the
moral was strangely coloured by the fancy of early men. In Perrault
little but the moral, told in a gallant apologue, remains. It may be
compared with a Thibetan story, analysed by M. Gaston Paris[92].

[Footnote 91: Theal's _Kaffir Folk Lore_, p. 37.]

[Footnote 92: _Revue Critique_, July, 1874.]


  LE PETIT POUCET.

  _Hop o' my Thumb._

Perrault's tale of _Le Petit Poucet_ has nothing but the name in common
with the legend of _Le Petit Poucet_ (our 'Tom Thumb') on which M.
Gaston Paris has written a learned treatise. The Poucet who conducts the
Walloon _Chaur-Poce_, our 'Charles's Wain,' merely resembles Hop o' my
Thumb in his tiny stature, and little can be gained by a comparison of
two personages so unlike in their adventures (Gaston Paris, _Mém. de la
Société de Linguistique_, i. 4, p. 372).

In _Hop o' my Thumb_, as Perrault tells it, there are many traces of
extreme antiquity.

The incidents are (1) Design of a distressed father and mother to expose
their children in a forest. (2) Discovery and frustration of the scheme
by the youngest child, whose clue leads him and his brethren home again.
(3) The same incident, but the clue (scattered crumbs) spoiled by birds.
(4) Arrival of the children at the house of an ogre. They are
entertained by his wife, but the ogre discovers them by the smell of
human flesh. (5) Hop o' my Thumb shifts the golden crowns of the ogre's
children to the heads of his brethren, and the ogre destroys his own
family in the dark. (6) Flight of the boys, pursued by the ogre in
Seven-Leagued Boots. (7) There is a choice of conclusion. In one (8) Hop
o' my Thumb steals the boots of the sleeping ogre, and gets his
treasures from the ogre's wife. (9) Hop o' my Thumb steals the boots and
by their aid wins court favour. Throughout the tale the skill of an
extremely small boy is the subject of admiration.

(1) The opening of the story has nothing supernatural or unusual in it.
During the famines which Racine and Vauban deplored, peasants must often
have been tempted to 'lose' their children (Sainte-Beuve, _Port Royal_,
vi. 153; _Mémoires sur la Vie de Jean Racine_. A Genève, M.DCCXLVII, pp.
271-3).

(2) The idea of dropping objects which may serve as a guide or 'trail'
is so natural and obvious that it is used in 'paper-chases' every day.
In the Indian story[93] of _Surya Bai_, a handful of grains is
scattered, the pearls of a necklace are used in the _Raksha's Palace_,
in Grimm (15, _Hänsel and Grethel_) white pebbles and crumbs of bread
are employed. The Kaffir girl drops ashes[94]. In _Nennilloe Nennella_
(_Pentamerone_, v. 8) the father of the children has pity on them, and
makes a trail of ashes. Bran is used on the second journey, but it is
eaten by an ass[95].

(4) The children arrive at the house of an ogre, whose wife treats them
kindly; the ogre, however, smells them out.

This incident, quite recognisable, is found in Namaqua folklore (Bleek,
_Bushman Folk Lore_). A Namaqua woman has married an elephant. To her
come her two brothers, whom she hides away. 'Then the Elephant, who had
been in the veldt, arrived, and smelling something, rubbed against the
house.' His wife persuades him that she has slain and cooked a wether,
indeed she does cook a wether, to hide the smell of human flesh.

Compare Perrault, 'L'Ogre flairoit droite et à gauche, disant qu'il
sentoit la chair fraîche. Il faut, luy dit sa femme, que ce soit ce veau
que je viens d'habiller que vous sentez.' But the ogre, like the blind
mother of the Elephant in Namaqua, retains his suspicions. In the Zulu
tale of Uzembeni (Callaway, p. 49) there is an ogress very hungry and
terrible, who has even tried to eat her own daughters. She comes home,
where Uzembeni is concealed, and says, 'My children, in my house here
today there is a delicious odour!' As Callaway remarks, this
'Fee-fo-fum' incident recurs in Maori myth, when Maui visits
Murri-ranga-whenua, and in the legend of Tawhaki, where the ogre is a
submarine ogre (Grey's _Polynes. Myth._ pp. 34, 64). In a more familiar
passage the Eumenides utter their _fee-fo-fum_ when they smell out
Orestes[96].

In the extreme north-west of America this world-wide notion meets us
again, among the Dènè Hareskins (Petitot, _Traditions Indiennes du
Canada Nord-Ouest_, Paris, 1886, p. 171). The stranger comes to strange
people, 'un jeune garçon sort d'une maison et dit, Moi, je sens l'odeur
humaine ... ce disant, il humait l'air, et reniflait à la manière d'un
limier qui est sur une piste.' In the Aberdeenshire _Mally Whuppy_, we
have the old

  Fee, fie, fo, fum,
  I smell the blood of some earthly one![97]

The idea of cannibalism, which inspires most of these tales, like the
Indian stories of _Rakshas_, is probably derived from the savage state
of general hostility and actual anthropophagy (_Die Anthropophagie_,
Überlebsel im Volksglauben.' Andree, Leipzig, 1887). We know that
Basutos have reverted to cannibalism in this century; in Labrador and
the wilder Ojibbeway districts, Weendigoes, or men returned to
cannibalism, are greatly dreaded (Hind's _Explorations in Labrador_, i.
p. 59). There are some very distressing stories in Kohl (_Kitchi Gami_,
p. 355-359). A prejudice against eating kindred flesh, (as against
eating Totems or kindred animals and vegetables,) is common among
savages. Hence the wilder South American tribes, says Cieza de Leon,
bred children they might lawfully eat from wives of alien stock, the
father being reckoned not akin to his children, who follow the maternal
line. Thus the great prevalence of cannibalism in European _Märchen_
seems a survival from the savage condition. In savage _Märchen_, where
cannibalism is no less common, it needs little explanation; not that all
savages are cannibals, but most live on the frontier of starvation, and
have even less scruple than Europeans in the ultimate resort.

(5) Arrived at the ogre's house, Hop o' my Thumb deceives the cannibal,
and makes him slay his own children.

This is decidedly a milder form of the incident in which the captive
either cooks his captor, or makes the captor devour some of his own
family. In Zululand (Callaway, pp. 16-18, _Uhlakanyana_) we find the
former agreeable adventure. Uhlakanyana, trapped by the cannibal, gets
the cannibal's mother to play with him at boiling each other. The old
lady cries out that she is 'being done,' but the artful lad replies,
'When a man has been thoroughly done, he does not keep crying I am
already done. He just says nothing when he is already done.... Now you
have become silent; that is the reason why I think you are thoroughly
done. You will be eaten by your children.' Callaway justly compares the
Gaelic Maol a Chliobain, who got the Giant's mother to take her place in
the Giant's game-bag,--with consequences (Campbell, i. 255). In Grimm's
_Hänsel and Grethel_ Peggy bakes the ogress. The trick recurs in the
Kaffir _Hlakanyana_[98]. There are two ways of doing this trick in
popular tales: either the prisoner is in a sack, and induces another
person to take his place (as in the Aberdonian _Mally Whuppy_, and among
the Kaffirs); or they play at cooking each other; or, in some other way,
the captive induces the captor to enter the pot or oven, and, naturally,
keeps him there. This is the device of the German Grethel and the Zulu
Uhlakanyana. The former plan, of the game-bag, prevails among the South
Siberian peoples of the Turkish race. Tardanak was caught by a
seven-headed monster and put in a bag. He made his way out, and induced
the monster's children to take his place. The monster, Jalbagan, then
cooked his own children. Perrault wisely makes his ogre a little
intoxicated, but he did not carry his mistake so far as to _eat_ his
children.

The expedient by which Hop o' my Thumb saves his company, and makes the
ogre's children perish, differs from the usual devices of the game-bag
and the oven. Hop o' my Thumb exchanges the nightcaps of himself and his
brothers for the golden crowns of the ogre's daughters. But even this is
not original. In the many _Märchen_ which are melted together into the
legend of the Minyan House of Athamas, this idea occurs. According to
Hyginus, Themisto, wife of Athamas, wished to destroy the children of
her rival Ino. She, therefore, to distinguish the children, bade the
nurse dress her children in white night-gowns, and Ino's children in
black. But this nurse (so ancient is the central idea of _East Lynne_)
was Ino herself in disguise, and she reversed the directions she had
received. Themisto, therefore, murdered her own children in the dusk, as
the ogre slew his own daughters. M. Deulin quotes a Catalan tale, in
which the boys escape from a cupboard, where they place the daughters of
the ogress, and they then sleep in the daughters' bed.

(6) The flight of Hop o' my Thumb and his brethren is usually aided, in
Zulu, Kaffir, Iroquois, Samoan, Japanese, Scotch, German, and other
tales, by magical objects, which, when thrown behind the fugitives,
become lakes, forests, and the like, thus detaining the pursuer.
Perrault knows nothing of this. His seven-leagued boots, used by the
ogre and stolen by the hero, doubtless are by the same maker as the
sandals of Hermes; the goodly sandals, golden, that wax never old
(_Odyssey_, v. 45).

In addition to these shoon, and the shoon of Loki, and the slippers of
Poutraka in the _Kathasaritsagara_ (i. 13), we may name the
seven-leagued boots in the very rare old Italian rhymed _Historia
delliombruno_, a black-letter tract, which contains one of the earliest
representations of these famous articles.

While these main incidents of Hop o' my Thumb are so widely current, the
general idea of a small and tricksy being is found frequently, from the
Hermes of the Homeric Hymn to the Namaqua Heitsi Eibib, the other
_Poucet_, or Tom Thumb, and the Zulu Uhlakanyana. Extraordinary
precocity, even from the day of birth, distinguishes these beings (as
Indra and Hermes) in _myth_. In _Märchen_ it is rather their smallness
and astuteness than their youth that commands admiration, though they
are often very precocious. The general sense of the humour of 'infant
prodigies' is perhaps the origin of these romances.

For a theory of _Hop o' my Thumb_, in which the forest is the night, the
pebbles and crumbs the stars, the ogre the devouring Sun, the ogre's
daughters 'the seven Vedic sisters,' and so forth, the curious may
consult M. Hyacinthe Husson, M. André Lefèvre, or M. Frédérick Dillaye's
_Contes de Charles Perrault_ (Paris, 1880).

[Footnote 93: _Old Deccan Days._]

[Footnote 94: Theal, p. 113.]

[Footnote 95: The remainder of the story in the _Pentamerone_ is
entirely different. There is no ogre, and there are sea-faring
adventures.]

[Footnote 96: _Eumenides_, 244.]

[Footnote 97: Compare _L'Oiseau Vert_. Cosquin, _Contes de Lorraine_, i.
103.]

[Footnote 98: Theal, p. 93.]


  CONCLUSION.

The study of Perrault's tales which we have made serves to illustrate
the problems and difficulties of the subject in general. It has been
seen that similar and analogous _contes_ are found among most peoples,
ancient and modern. When the resemblances are only in detached ideas and
incidents, for example, the introduction of rational and loquacious
beasts, or of magical powers, the difficulty of accounting for the
diffusion of such notions is comparatively slight. All the backward
peoples of the world believe in magic, and in the common nature of men,
beasts, and things. The real problem is to explain the coincidence in
_plot_ of stories found in ancient Egypt, in Peru, in North America, and
South Africa, as well as in Europe. In a few words it is possible to
sketch the various theories of the origin and diffusion of legends like
these.

I. According to what may be called the Aryan theory (advocated by Grimm,
M. André Lefèvre, Von Hahn, and several English writers), the stories
are peculiar to peoples who speak languages of the Aryan family. These
peoples, in some very remote age, before they left their original seats,
developed a copious mythology, based mainly on observation of natural
phenomena, Dawn, Thunder, Wind, Night, and the like. This mythology was
rendered possible by a 'disease of language,' owing to which statements
about phenomena came to appear like statements about imaginary persons,
and so grew into myths. _Märchen_, or popular tales, are the _débris_,
or _detritus_, or youngest form of those myths, worn by constant passing
from mouth to mouth. The partisans of this theory often maintain that
the borrowing of tales by one people from another is, if not an
impossible, at least a very rare process.

II. The next hypothesis may be called the Indian theory. The chief
partisan of this theory was Benfey, the translator and commentator of
the _Pantschatantra_. In France M. Cosquin, author of _Contes Populaires
de Lorraine_, is the leading representative. According to the Indian
theory, the original centre and fountain of popular tales is India, and
from India of the historic period the legends were diffused over Europe,
Asia, and Africa. Oral tradition, during the great national movements
and migrations, and missions,--the Mongol conquests, the crusades, the
Buddhist enterprises, and in course of trade and commerce, diffused the
tales. They were also in various translations,--Persian, Arabic,
Greek,--of Indian literary collections like the _Pantschatantra_ and the
_Hitopadesa_, brought to the knowledge of mediæval Europe. Preachers
even used the tales as parables or 'examples' in the pulpit, and by all
those means the stories found their way about the world. It is admitted
that the discovery of _contes_ in Egypt, at a date when nothing is known
of India, is a difficulty in the way of this theory, as we are not able
to show that those _contes_ came from India, nor that India borrowed
them from Egypt. The presence of the tales in America is explained as
the consequence of importations from Europe, since the discovery of the
New World by Columbus.

Neither of these theories, neither the Aryan nor the Indian, is quite
satisfactory. The former depends on a doctrine about the 'disease of
language' not universally accepted. Again, it entirely fails to account
for the presence of the _contes_ (which, _ex hypothesi_, were not
_borrowed_) among non-Aryan peoples. The second, or Indian theory,
correctly states that many stories were introduced into Europe, Asia,
and Africa from India, in the middle ages, but brings no proof that
_contes_ could only have been invented in India, first of all. Nor does
it account for the stories which were old in Egypt, and even mixed up
with the national mythology of Egypt, before we knew anything about
India at all, nor for the _Märchen_ of Homeric Greece. Again it is not
shown that the _ideas_ in the _contes_ are peculiar to India; almost the
only example adduced is the _gratitude of beasts_. But this notion might
occur to any mind, anywhere, which regarded the beasts as on the same
intellectual and moral level as humanity. Moreover, a few examples have
been found of _Märchen_ among American races, for example, in early
Peru, where there is no reason to believe that they were introduced by
the Spaniards[99].

In place of these hypotheses, we do not propose to substitute any
general theory. It is certain that the best-known popular tales were
current in Egypt under Ramses II, and that many of them were known to
Homer, and are introduced, or are alluded to, in the _Odyssey_. But it
is impossible to argue that the birthplace of a tale is the country
where it is first found in a literary shape. The stories must have been
current in the popular mouth long before they won their way into written
literature, on tablets of clay or on papyrus. They are certainly not of
literary invention. If they were developed in one place, history gives
us no information as to the region or the date of their birth. Again, we
cannot pretend to know how far, given the ideas, the stories might be
evolved independently in different centres. It is difficult to set a
limit to chance and coincidence, and modern importation. The whole
question of the importation of stories into savage countries by
civilised peoples has not been studied properly. We can hardly suppose
that the Zulus borrowed their copious and most characteristic store of
_Märchen_, in plot and incident resembling the _Märchen_ of Europe, from
Dutch or English settlers. On the other hand, certain Algonkin tales
recently published by Mr. Leland bear manifest marks of French
influence.

Left thus in the dark without historical information as to the 'cradle'
of _Märchen_, without clear and copious knowledge as to _recent_
borrowing from European traders and settlers, and without the power of
setting limits to the possibility of _coincidence_, we are unable to
give any general answer to the sphinx of popular tales. We only know for
certain that there is practically no limit to the chances of
transmission in the remote past of the race. Wherever man, woman, or
child can go, there a tale may go, and may find a new home. Any drifted
and wandering canoe, any captured alien wife, any stolen slave passed
from hand to hand in commerce or war, may carry a _Märchen_. These
processes of transmission have been going on, practically, ever since
man was man. Thus it is even more difficult to limit the possibilities
of transmission than the chances of coincidence. But the chances of
coincidence also are numerous. The _ideas_ and _situations_ of popular
tales are all afloat, everywhere, in the imaginations of early and of
pre-scientific men. Who can tell how often they might casually unite in
similar wholes, independently combined?

[Footnote 99: _Rites of the Yncas_, Francisco de Avila. Hakluyt
Society.]


  [Illustration: Charles Perrault.]




  HISTOIRES

  OU

  CONTES
  DU TEMPS PASSÉ.

  _Avec des Moralitéz._


  A PARIS,

  Chez CLAUDE BARBIN, sur le
  second Peron de la Sainte-Chapelle,
  au Palais.


  _Avec Privilége de Sa Majesté._

  M.DC.XCVII.




  TABLE

  des Contes de ce Recüeil.


  _La belle au bois dormant_                         p. 7

  _Le petit chaperon rouge_                         p. 20

  _La Barbe bleüe_                                  p. 23

  _Le Maistre Chat, ou le Chat Botté_               p. 30

  _Les Fées_                                        p. 37

  _Cendrillon, ou la petite pantoufle de verre_     p. 41

  _Riquet à la Houppe_                              p. 50

  _Le petit Pouçet_                                 p. 60





  A

  MADEMOISELLE


MADEMOISELLE,

_On ne trouvera pas étrange qu'un Enfant ait pris plaisir à composer les
Contes de ce Recüeil, mais on s'étonnera qu'il ait eu la hardiesse de
vous les presenter. Cependant,_ MADEMOISELLE, _quelque disproportion
qu'il y ait entre la simplicité de ces Recits, & les lumieres de vostre
esprit, si on examine bien ces Contes, on verra que je ne suis pas aussi
blamable que je le parois d'abord. Ils renferment tous une Morale
trés-sensée, & qui se découvre plus ou moins, selon le degré de
pénetration de ceux qui les lisent; d'ailleurs comme rien ne marque tant
la vaste estenduë d'un esprit, que de pouvoir s'élever en même-temps aux
plus grandes choses, & s'abaisser aux plus petites; on ne sera point
surpris que la même Princesse, à qui la Nature & l'éducation ont rendu
familier ce qu'il y a de plus élevé, ne dédaigne pas de prendre plaisir
à de semblables bagatelles. Il est vray que ces Contes donnent une image
de ce qui se passe dans les moindres Familles, où la loüable impatience
d'instruire les enfans, fait imaginer des Histoires dépourveuës de
raison, pour s'accommoder à ces mêmes enfans qui n'en ont pas encore;
mais à qui convient-il mieux de connoître comment vivent les Peuples,
qu'aux Personnes que le Ciel destine à les conduire? Le desir de cette
connoissance à poussé des Heros, & même des Heros de vostre Race, jusque
dans des huttes & des cabanes, pour y voir de prés & par eux-mêmes ce
qui s'y passoit de plus particulier: Cette connoissance leur ayant paru
necessaire pour leur parfaite instruction. Quoi qu'il en soit,_
MADEMOISELLE,

  Pouvois-je mieux choisir pour rendre vrai-semblable
        Ce que la Fable à d'incroyable?
        Et jamais Fée, au tems jadis
        Fit-elle à jeune Créature,
        Plus de dons, & de dons exquis,
        Que vous en a fait la Nature.

_Je suis avec un trés-profond respect,_

    MADEMOISELLE,

  De Vôtre Altesse Royale,

  Le trés-humble &
     trés-obéissant serviteur,

        P. DARMANCOUR.




  LA BELLE AU BOIS DORMANT

  _CONTE._


Il estoit une fois un Roi & une Reine, qui estoient si faschez de
n'avoir point d'enfans, si faschez qu'on ne sçauroit dire. Ils allerent
à toutes les eaux du monde, voeux, pelerinages, menuës devotions; tout
fut mis en oeuvre, & rien n'y faisoit: Enfin pourtant la Reine devint
grosse, & accoucha d'une fille: on fit un beau Baptesme; on donna pour
Maraines à la petite Princesse toutes les Fées qu'on pust trouver dans
le Pays, (il s'en trouva sept,) afin que chacune d'elles luy faisant un
don, comme c'estoit la coustume des Fées en ce temps-là, la Princesse
eust par ce moyen toutes les perfections imaginables. Aprés les
ceremonies du Baptesme toute la compagnie revint au Palais du Roi, où il
y avoit un grand festin pour les Fées. On mit devant chacune d'elles un
couvert magnifique, avec un estui d'or massif, où il y avoit une
cuillier, une fourchette, & un couteau de fin or, garni de diamans & de
rubis. Mais comme chacun prenoit sa place à table, on vit entrer une
vieille Fée qu'on n'avoit point priée parce qu'il y avoit plus de
cinquante ans qu'elle n'estoit sortie d'une Tour, & qu'on la croyoit
morte, ou enchantée. Le Roi lui fit donner un couvert, mais il n'y eut
pas moyen de lui donner un estuy d'or massif, comme aux autres, parce
que l'on n'en avoit fait faire que sept pour les sept Fées. La vieille
crût qu'on la méprisoit, & grommela quelques menaces entre ses dents:
Une des jeunes Fées qui se trouva auprés d'elle, l'entendit, & jugeant
qu'elle pourrait donner quelque fâcheux don à la petite Princesse, alla
dés qu'on fut sorti de table, se cacher derriere la tapisserie, afin de
parler la derniere, & de pouvoir réparer autant qu'il luy seroit
possible le mal que la vieille auroit fait. Cependant les Fées
commencerent à faire leurs dons à la Princesse. La plus jeune luy donna
pour don qu'elle seroit la plus belle personne du monde, celle d'aprés
qu'elle auroit de l'esprit comme un Ange, la troisiéme qu'elle auroit
une grace admirable à tout ce qu'elle feroit, la quatriéme qu'elle
danseroit parfaitement bien, la cinquiéme qu'elle chanteroit comme un
Rossignol, & la sixiéme qu'elle joüeroit de toutes sortes d'instrumens
dans la derniere perfection. Le rang de la vieille Fée estant venu, elle
dit en branlant la teste, encore plus de dépit que de vieillesse, que la
Princesse se perceroit la main d'un fuseau, & qu'elle en mourroit. Ce
terrible don fit fremir toute la compagnie, & il n'y eut personne qui ne
pleurât. Dans ce moment la jeune Fée sortit de derriere la tapisserie, &
dit tout haut ces paroles: Rassurez-vous Roi et Reine, vostre fille n'en
mourra pas: il est vrai que je n'ay pas assez de puissance pour défaire
entierement ce que mon ancienne a fait. La Princesse se percera la main
d'un fuseau; mais au lieu d'en mourir, elle tombera seulement dans un
profond sommeil qui durera cent ans, au bout desquels le fils d'un Roi
viendra la réveiller. Le Roi pour tâcher d'éviter le malheur annoncé par
la vieille, fit publier aussi tost un Edit, par lequel il deffendoit à
toutes personnes de filer au fuseau, ny d'avoir des fuseaux chez soy sur
peine de la vie. Au bout de quinze ou seize ans, le Roi & la Reine
estant allez à une de leurs Maisons de plaisance, il arriva que la jeune
Princesse courant un jour dans le Château, & montant de chambre en
chambre, alla jusqu'au haut d'un donjon dans un petit galletas, où une
bonne Vieille estoit seule à filer sa quenoüille. Cette bonne femme
n'avoit point ouï parler des deffenses que le Roi avoit faites de filer
au fuseau. Que faites-vous-là, ma bonne femme, dit la Princesse; je
file, ma belle enfant, luy répondit la vieille qui ne la connoissoit
pas. Ha! que cela est joli, reprit la Princesse, comment faites-vous?
donnez-moy que je voye si j'en ferois bien autant. Elle n'eust pas
plutost pris le fuseau, que comme elle estoit fort vive, un peu
estourdie, & que d'ailleurs l'Arrest des Fées l'ordonnoit ainsi, elle
s'en perça la main, & tomba évanouie. La bonne vieille bien embarrassée,
crie au secours: on vient de tous costez, on jette de l'eau au visage de
la Princesse, on la délasse, on luy frappe dans les mains, on luy frotte
les temples avec de l'eau de la Reine de Hongrie; mais rien ne la
faisoit revenir. Alors le Roy, qui estoit monté au bruit, se souvint de
la prédiction des Fées, & jugeant bien qu'il falloit que cela arrivast,
puisque les Fées l'avoient dit, fit mettre la Princesse dans le plus bel
appartement du Palais, sur un lit en broderie d'or & d'argent; on eut
dit d'un Ange, tant elle estoit belle; car son évanoüissement n'avoit
pas osté les couleurs vives de son teint: ses jouës estoient incarnates,
& ses lévres comme du corail: elle avoit seulement les yeux fermez, mais
on l'entendoit respirer doucement, ce qui faisoit voir qu'elle n'estoit
pas morte. Le Roi ordonna qu'on la laissast dormir en repos, jusqu'à ce
que son heure de se réveiller fust venuë. La bonne Fée qui luy avoit
sauvé la vie, en la condamnant à dormir cent ans, estoit dans le Royaume
de Mataquin, à douze mille lieuës de là lorsque l'accident arriva à la
Princesse; mais elle en fut avertie en un instant par un petit Nain, qui
avoit des bottes de sept lieuës, (c'estoit des bottes avec lesquelles on
faisoit sept lieuës d'une seule enjambée.) La Fée partit aussi tost, &
on la vit au bout d'une heure arriver dans un chariot tout de feu,
traisné par des dragons. Le Roi luy alla presenter la main à la descente
du chariot. Elle approuva tout ce qu'il avoit fait; mais comme elle
estoit grandement prévoyante, elle pensa que quand la Princesse
viendroit à se réveiller, elle seroit bien embarassée toute seule dans
ce vieux Château: voicy ce qu'elle fit. Elle toucha de sa baguette tout
ce qui estoit dans ce Chasteau, (hors le Roi & la Reine) Gouvernantes,
Filles-d'Honneur, Femmes-de-Chambre, Gentilshommes, Officiers,
Maistrés-d'Hostel, Cuisiniers, Marmitons, Galopins, Gardes, Suisses,
Pages, Valets-de-pied; elle toucha aussi tous les chevaux qui estoient
dans les Ecuries, avec les Palfreniers, les gros mâtins de basse cour, &
la petite Pouffe, petite chienne de la Princesse, qui estoit auprés
d'elle sur son lit. Dés qu'elle les eust touchez, ils s'endormirent
tous, pour ne se réveiller qu'en même temps que leur Maistresse, afin
d'estre tout prests à la servir quand elle en auroit besoin: les broches
mêmes qui estoient au feu toutes pleines de perdrix & de faizans
s'endormirent, & le feu aussi. Tout cela se fit en un moment; les Fées
n'estoient pas longues à leur besogne. Alors le Roi & la Reine aprés
avoir baisé leur chere enfant sans qu'elle s'éveillast, sortirent du
Chasteau, & firent publier des deffenses à qui que ce soit d'en
approcher. Ces deffenses n'estoient pas necessaires, car il crut dans un
quart-d'heure tout au tour du parc une si grande quantité de grands
arbres & de petits, de ronces & d'épines entrelassées les unes dans les
autres, que beste ny homme n'y auroit pû passer: en sorte qu'on ne
voyoit plus que le haut des Tours du Chasteau, encore n'estoit-ce que de
bien loin. On ne douta point que la Fée n'eust encore fait là un tour de
son metier, afin que la Princesse pendant qu'elle dormiroit, n'eust rien
à craindre des Curieux.

Au bout de cent ans, le Fils du Roi qui regnoit alors, & qui estoit
d'une autre famille que la Princesse endormie, estant allé à la chasse
de ce costé-là, demanda ce que c'estoit que des Tours qu'il voyoit au
dessus d'un grand bois fort épais, chacun luy répondit selon qu'il en
avoit ouï parler. Les uns disoient que c'estoit un vieux Château où il
revenoit des Esprits; les autres que tous les Sorciers de la contrée y
faisoient leur sabbat. La plus commune opinion estoit qu'un Ogre y
demeuroit, & que là il emportoit tous les enfans qu'il pouvoit attraper,
pour les pouvoir manger à son aise, & sans qu'on le pust suivre, ayant
seul le pouvoir de se faire un passage au travers du bois. Le Prince ne
sçavoit qu'en croire, lors qu'un vieux Paysan prit la parole, & luy dit:
Mon Prince, il y a plus de cinquante ans que j'ay ouï dire à mon pere,
qu'il y avoit dans ce Chasteau une Princesse, la plus belle du monde;
qu'elle y devoit dormir cent ans, & qu'elle seroit reveillée par le fils
d'un Roy, à qui elle estoit reservée. Le jeune Prince à ce discours se
sentit tout de feu; il crut sans balancer qu'il mettroit fin à une si
belle avanture, & poussé par l'amour & par la gloire, il résolut de voir
sur le champ ce qui en estoit. A peine s'avança-t-il vers le bois, que
tous ces grands arbres, ces ronces & ces épines s'écarterent
d'elles-mesmes pour le laisser passer: il marche vers le Chasteau qu'il
voyoit au bout d'une grande avenuë où il entra, & ce qui le surprit un
peu, il vit que personne de ses gens ne l'avoient pû suivre, parce que
les arbres s'estoient rapprochez dés qu'il avoit esté passé. Il ne
laissa pas de continuer son chemin: un Prince jeune & amoureux est
toûjours vaillant. Il entra dans une grande avancour où tout ce qu'il
vit d'abord estoit capable de le glacer de crainte: c'estoit un silence
affreux, l'image de la mort s'y presentoit par tout, & ce n'estoit que
des corps étendus d'hommes & d'animaux, qui paroissoient morts. Il
reconnut pourtant bien au nez bourgeonne, & à la face vermeille des
Suisses, qu'ils n'estoient qu'endormis, & leur tasses où il y avoit
encore quelques goutes de vin, montroient assez qu'ils s'estoient
endormis en beuvant. Il passe une grande cour pavée de marbre, il monte
l'escalier, il entre dans la salle des Gardes qui estoient rangez en
haye, la carabine sur l'épaule, & ronflans de leur mieux. Il traverse
plusieurs chambres pleines de Gentilshommes & de Dames, dormans tous,
les uns de bout, les autres assis; il entre dans une chambre toute
dorée, & il vit sur un lit, dont les rideaux éstoient ouverts de tous
côtez, le plus beau spectacle qu'il eut jamais veu: Une Princesse qui
paroissoit avoir quinze ou seize ans, & dont l'éclat resplendissant
avoit quelque chose de lumineux & de divin. Il s'approcha en tremblant &
en admirant, & se mit à genoux auprés d'elle. Alors comme la fin de
l'enchantement estoit venuë, la Princesse s'éveilla; & le regardant avec
des yeux plus tendres qu'une premiere veuë ne sembloit le permettre;
est-ce vous, mon Prince, luy dit-elle, vous vous estes bien fait
attendre. Le Prince charmé de ces paroles, & plus encore de la maniere
dont elles estoient dites, ne sçavoit comment luy temoigner sa joye & sa
reconnoissance; il l'assura qu'il l'aimoit plus que luy-mesme. Ses
discours furent mal rangez, ils en plûrent davantage, peu d'éloquence,
beaucoup d'amour: Il estoit plus embarassé qu'elle, & l'on ne doit pas
s'en estonner; elle avoit eu le temps de songer à ce qu'elle auroit à
luy dire; car il y a apparence, (l'Histoire n'en dit pourtant rien) que
la bonne Fée pendant un si long sommeil, luy avoit procuré le plaisir
des songes agreables. Enfin il y avoit quatre heures qu'ils se
parloient, & ils ne s'étoient pas encore dit la moitié des choses qu'ils
avoient à se dire.

Cependant tout le Palais s'estoit réveillé avec la Princesse; chacun
songeoit à faire sa charge, & comme ils n'estoient pas tous amoureux,
ils mouroient de faim; la Dame d'honneur pressée comme les autres,
s'impatienta, & dit tout haut à la Princesse que la viande estoit
servie. Le Prince aida à la Princesse à se lever; elle estoit tout
habillée & fort magnifiquement; mais il se garda bien de luy dire
qu'elle estoit habillée comme ma mere grand, & qu'elle avoit un collet
monté, elle n'en estoit pas moins belle. Ils passerent dans un Salon de
miroirs, & y souperent, servis par les Officiers de la Princesse; les
Violons & les Hautbois joüerent de vieilles pieces, mais excellentes,
quoy qu'il y eut prés de cent ans qu'on ne les joüast plus; & aprés
soupé sans perdre de temps, le grand Aumonier les maria dans la Chapelle
du Chateau, & la Dame-d'honneur leur tira le rideau; ils dormirent peu,
la Princesse n'en avoit pas grand besoin, & le Prince la quitta dés le
matin pour retourner à la Ville, où son Pere devoit estre en peine de
luy: le Prince luy dit, qu'en chassant il s'estoit perdu dans la forest,
& qu'il avoit couché dans la hutte d'un Charbonnier, qui luy avoit fait
manger du pain noir & du fromage. Le Roi son pere qui estoit bon-homme,
le crut, mais sa Mere n'en fut pas bien persuadée, & voyant qu'il alloit
presque tous les jours à la chasse, & qu'il avoit toûjours une raison en
main pour s'excuser, quand il avoit couché deux ou trois nuits dehors,
elle ne douta plus qu'il n'eut quelque amourette: car il vêcut avec la
Princesse plus de deux ans entiers, & en eut deux enfans, dont le
premier qui fut une fille, fut nommée l'Aurore, & le second un fils,
qu'on nomma le Jour, parce qu'il paroissoit encore plus beau que sa
soeur. La Reine dit plusieurs fois à son fils, pour le faire expliquer,
qu'il falloit se contenter dans la vie, mais il n'osa jamais se fier à
elle de son secret; il la craignoit quoy qu'il l'aimast, car elle estoit
de race Ogresse, & le Roi ne l'avoit épousée qu'à cause de ses grands
biens; on disoit même tout bas à la Cour qu'elle avoit les inclinations
des Ogres, & qu'en voyant passer de petits enfans, elle avoit toutes les
peines du monde à se retenir de se jetter sur eux; ainsi le Prince ne
voulut jamais rien dire. Mais quand le Roy fut mort, ce qui arriva au
bout de deux ans, & qu'il se vit le maistre, il declara publiquement son
Mariage, & alla en grande ceremonie querir la Reine sa femme dans son
Chasteau. On luy fit une entrée magnifique dans la Ville Capitale, où
elle entra au milieu de ces deux enfans. Quelque temps aprés le Roi alla
faire la guerre à l'Empereur Cantalabutte son voisin. Il laissa la
Regence du Royaume à la Reine sa mere, & luy recommanda fort sa femme &
ses enfans: il devoit estre à la guerre tout l'Esté, & dés qu'il fut
parti, la Reine-Mere envoya sa Bru & ses enfans à une maison de campagne
dans les bois, pour pouvoir plus aisément assouvir son horrible envie.
Elle y alla quelques jours aprés, & dit un soir à son Maistre d'Hôtel,
je veux manger demain à mon dîner la petite Aurore. Ah! Madame, dit le
Maistre d'Hôtel; je le veux, dit la Reine (& elle le dit d'un ton
d'Ogresse, qui a envie de manger de la chair fraische) & je la veux
manger à la Sausse-robert. Ce pauvre homme voyant bien qu'il ne falloit
pas se joüer à une Ogresse, prit son grand cousteau, & monta à la
chambre de la petite Aurore: elle avoit pour lors quatre ans, & vint en
sautant & en riant se jetter à son col, & luy demander du bon du bon. Il
se mit à pleurer, le couteau luy tomba des mains, & il alla dans la
basse-cour couper la gorge à un petit agneau, et luy fit une si bonne
sausse, que sa Maîtresse l'assura qu'elle n'avoit jamais rien mangé de
si bon. Il avoit emporté en même temps la petite Aurore, & l'avoit
donnée à sa femme pour la cacher, dans le logement qu'elle avoit au fond
de la basse-cour. Huit jours aprés la méchante Reine dit à son
Maistre-d'Hôtel, je veux manger à mon souper le petit Jour: il ne
repliqua pas, résolu de la tromper comme l'autre fois; il alla chercher
le petit Jour, & le trouva avec un petit fleuret à la main, dont il
faisoit des armes avec un gros Singe, il n'avoit pourtant que trois ans:
il le porta à sa femme qui le cacha avec la petite Aurore, & donna à la
place du petit Jour, un petit chevreau fort tendre, que l'Ogresse trouva
admirablement bon.

Cela estoit fort bien allé jusques-là, mais un soir cette méchante Reine
dit au Maistre-d'Hôtel, je veux manger la Reine à la mesme sausse que
ses enfans. Ce fut alors que le pauvre Maistre-d'Hôtel desespera de la
pouvoir encore tromper. La jeune Reine avoit vingt ans passez, sans
compter les cent ans qu'elle avoit dormi: sa peau estoit un peu dure,
quoyque belle & blanche; & le moyen de trouver dans la Ménagerie une
beste aussi dure que cela: il prit la résolution pour sauver sa vie, de
couper la gorge à la Reine, & monta dans sa chambre, dans l'intention de
n'en pas faire à deux fois; il s'excitoit à la fureur, & il entra le
poignard à la main dans la chambre de la jeune Reine: Il ne voulut
pourtant point la surprendre, & il lui dit avec beaucoup de respect,
l'ordre qu'il avoit receu de la Reine-Mere. Faites vostre devoir, luy
dit-elle, en lui tendant le col; executez l'ordre qu'on vous a donné;
j'irai revoir mes enfans, mes pauvres enfans que j'ay tant aimez, car
elle les croyoit morts depuis qu'on les avoit enlevez sans lui rien
dire. Non, non, Madame, lui répondit le pauvre Maistre-d'Hôtel tout
attendri, vous ne mourrez point, & vous ne laisserez pas d'aller revoir
vos chers enfans, mais ce sera chez moy où je les ay cachez, & je
tromperay encore la Reine, en luy faisant manger une jeune biche en
vostre place. Il la mena aussi-tost à sa chambre, où la laissant
embrasser ses enfans & pleurer avec eux: il alla accommoder une biche,
que la Reine mangea à son soupé, avec le même appetit que si c'eut esté
la jeune Reine. Elle estoit bien contente de sa cruauté, & elle se
préparoit à dire au Roy à son retour, que les loups enragez avoient
mangé la Reine sa femme & ses deux enfans.

Un soir qu'elle rodoit à son ordinaire dans les cours & basse-cours du
Chasteau pour y halener quelque viande fraische, elle entendit dans une
sale basse le petit Jour qui pleuroit, parce que la Reine sa mere le
vouloit faire foüetter, à cause qu'il avoit esté méchant, & elle
entendit aussi la petite Aurore qui demandoit pardon pour son frere.
L'Ogresse reconnut la voix de la Reine & de ses enfans, & furieuse
d'avoir esté trompée, elle commande dés le lendemain au matin, avec une
voix épouventable, qui faisoit trembler tout le monde, qu'on apportast
au milieu de la cour une grande cuve, qu'elle fit remplir de crapaux, de
viperes, de couleuvres & de serpens, pour y faire jetter la Reine, & ses
enfans, le Maistre-d'Hôstel, sa femme & sa servante: elle avoit donné
ordre de les amener les mains liées derriere le dos. Ils estoient là, &
les bourreaux se preparoient à les jetter dans la cuve, lorsque le Roi
qu'on n'attendoit pas si tost, entra dans la cour à cheval; il estoit
venu en poste, & demanda tout estonné ce que vouloit dire cet horrible
spectacle; personne n'osoit l'en instruire, quand l'Ogresse, enragée de
voir ce quelle voyoit, se jetta elle-mesme la teste la premiere dans la
cuve, & fût devorée en un instant par les vilaines bestes qu'elle y
avoit fait mettre. Le Roi ne laissa pas d'en estre fasché, elle estoit
sa mere, mais il s'en consola bientost avec sa belle femme & ses enfans.


  MORALITÉ.

  _Attendre quelque temps pour avoir un Epoux,
      Riche bien-fait, galant & doux,
      La chose est assez naturelle,
  Mais l'attendre cent ans et toûjours en dormant,
      On ne trouve plus de femelle,
      Qui dormist si tranquillement.
  La Fable semble encor vouloir nous faire entendre,
  Que souvent de l'Hymen les agreables noeuds,
  Pour estre differez n'en sont pas moins heureux,
      Et qu'on ne perd rien pour attendre;
      Mais le sexe avec tant d'ardeur,
      Aspire à la foy conjugale,
    Que je n'ay pas la force ny le coeur,
      De luy prescher cette Morale._




  LE PETIT CHAPERON ROUGE

  _CONTE._


Il estoit une fois une petite fille de Village, la plus jolie qu'on eut
sçû voir; sa mere en estoit folle, & sa mere grand plus folle encore.
Cette bonne femme luy fit faire un petit chaperon rouge, qui luy seïoit
si bien, que par tout on l'appelloit le Petit chaperon rouge.

Un jour sa mere ayant cui & fait des galettes, luy dit, va voir comme se
porte ta mere-grand, car on m'a dit qu'elle estoit malade, porte luy une
galette & ce petit pot de beure. Le petit chaperon rouge partit
aussi-tost pour aller chez sa mere-grand, qui demeuroit dans un autre
Village. En passant dans un bois elle rencontra compere le Loup, qui eut
bien envie de la manger, mais il n'osa, à cause de quelques Bucherons
qui estoient dans la Forest. Il luy demanda où elle alloit; la pauvre
enfant qui ne sçavoit pas qu'il est dangereux de s'arrester à écouter un
Loup, luy dit, je vais voir ma Mere-grand, & luy porter une galette avec
un petit pot de beurre, que ma Mere luy envoye. Demeure-t'elle bien
loin, lui dit le Loup? Oh ouy, dit le petit chaperon rouge, c'est par
de-là le moulin que vous voyez tout là-bas, là-bas, à la premiere maison
du Village. Et bien, dit le Loup, je veux l'aller voir aussi; je m'y en
vais par ce chemin icy, & toi par ce chemin-là, & nous verrons qui
plûtost y sera. Le Loup se mit à courir de toute sa force par le chemin
qui estoit le plus court, & la petite fille s'en alla par le chemin le
plus long, s'amusant à cueillir des noisettes, à courir aprés des
papillons, & à faire des bouquets des petites fleurs qu'elle
rencontroit. Le Loup ne fut pas long-temps à arriver à la maison de la
Mere-grand, il heurte: Toc, toc, qui est-là? C'est vôtre fille le petit
chaperon rouge (dit le Loup, en contrefaisant sa voix) qui vous apporte
une galette, & un petit pot de beurre que ma Mere vous envoye. La bonne
Mere-grand qui estoit dans son lit à cause qu'elle se trouvoit un peu
mal, luy cria, tire la chevillette, la bobinette chera, le Loup tira la
chevillette, & la porte s'ouvrit. Il se jetta sur la bonne femme, & la
devora en moins de rien; car il y avoit plus de trois jours qu'il
n'avoit mangé. Ensuite il ferma la porte, & s'alla coucher dans le lit
de la Mere-grand, en attendant le petit chaperon rouge, qui quelque
temps aprés vint heurter à la porte. Toc, toc: qui est là? Le petit
chaperon rouge qui entendit la grosse voix du Loup, eut peur d'abord,
mais croyant que sa Mere-grand estoit enrhumée, répondit, c'est vostre
fille le petit chaperon rouge, qui vous apporte une galette & un petit
pot de beurre que ma Mere vous envoye. Le Loup luy cria, en adoucissant
un peu sa voix; tire la chevillette, la bobinette chera. Le petit
chaperon rouge tira la chevillette, & la porte s'ouvrit. Le Loup la
voyant entrer, lui dit en se cachant dans le lit sous la couverture:
mets la galette & le petit pot de beurre sur la huche, & viens te
coucher avec moy. Le petit chaperon rouge se deshabille, & va se mettre
dans le lit, où elle fut bien estonnée de voir comment sa Mere-grand
estoit faite en son deshabillé, elle luy dit, ma mere-grand que vous
avez de grands bras! c'est pour mieux t'embrasser, ma fille: ma
mere-grand que vous avez de grandes jambes? c'est pour mieux courir mon
enfant: ma mere-grand que vous avez de grandes oreilles? c'est pour
mieux écouter mon enfant. Ma mere-grand que vous avez de grands yeux?
c'est pour mieux voir, mon enfant. Ma mere-grand que vous avez de
grandes dens? c'est pour te manger. Et en disant ces mots, ce méchant
Loup se jetta sur le petit chaperon rouge, & la mangea.


  MORALITÉ.

  _On voit icy que de jeunes enfans,
    Sur tout de jeunes filles,
      Belles, bien faites, & gentilles,
  Font tres-mal d'écouter toute sorte de gens,
      Et que ce n'est pas chose étrange,
      S'il en est tant que le loup mange.
      Je dis le loup, car tous les loups;
      Ne sont pas de la mesme sorte;
      Il en est d'une humeur accorte,
      Sans bruit, sans fiel & sans couroux,
      Qui privez, complaisans & doux,
      Suivant les jeunes Demoiselles,
  Jusque dans les maisons, jusque dans les ruelles;
    Mais helas! qui ne sçait que ces Loups doucereux,
      De tous les Loups sont les plus dangereux._




  LA BARBE BLEUË.


Il estoit une fois un homme qui avoit de belles maisons à la Ville & à
la Campagne, de la vaisselle d'or & d'argent, des meubles en broderie, &
des carosses tout dorez; mais par malheur cet homme avoit la
Barbe-bleüe: cela le rendoit si laid & si terrible, qu'il n'estoit ni
femme ni fille qui ne s'enfuit de devant luy. Une de ses Voisines, Dame
de qualité avoit deux filles parfaitement belles. Il luy en demanda une
en Mariage, & luy laissa le choix de celle qu'elle voudroit luy donner.
Elles n'en vouloient point toutes deux, & se le renvoyoient l'une à
l'autre, ne pouvant se resoudre à prendre un homme qui eut la barbe
bleüe. Ce qui les degoûtoit encore, c'est qu'il avoit déja épousé
plusieurs femmes, & qu'on ne sçavoit ce que ces femmes estoient
devenuës. La Barbe bleuë pour faire connoissance, les mena avec leur
Mere, & trois ou quatre de leurs meilleures amies, & quelques jeunes
gens du voisinage, à une de ses maisons de Campagne, où on demeura huit
jours entiers. Ce n'estoit que promenades, que parties de chasse & de
pesche, que danses & festins, que collations: on ne dormoit point, & on
passoit toute la nuit à se faire des malices les uns aux autres: enfin
tout alla si bien, que la Cadette commença à trouver que le Maistre du
logis n'avoit plus la barbe si bleüe, & que c'estoit un fort honneste
homme. Dés qu'on fust de retour à la Ville, le Mariage se conclut. Au
bout d'un mois la Barbe bleüe dit à sa femme qu'il estoit obligé de
faire un voyage en Province, de six semaines au moins, pour une affaire
de consequence; qu'il la prioit de se bien divertir pendant son absence,
qu'elle fit venir ses bonnes amies, qu'elle les menast à la Campagne si
elle vouloit, que par tout elle fit bonne chere: Voila, luy dit-il, les
clefs des deux grands garde-meubles, voilà celles de la vaisselle d'or &
d'argent qui ne sert pas tous les jours, voilà celles de mes coffres
forts, où est mon or & mon argent, celles des cassettes où sont mes
pierreries, & voilà le passe-par-tout de tous les appartemens: pour
cette petite clef-cy, c'est la clef du cabinet au bout de la grande
gallerie de l'appartement bas: ouvrez tout, allez par tout, mais pour ce
petit cabinet je vous deffens d'y entrer, & je vous le deffens de telle
sorte, que s'il vous arrive de l'ouvrir, il n'y a rien que vous ne
deviez attendre de ma colere. Elle promit d'observer exactement tout ce
qui luy venoit d'estre ordonné: & luy, aprés l'avoir embrassée, il monte
dans son carosse, & part pour son voyage. Les voisines & les bonnes
amies n'attendirent pas qu'on les envoyast querir pour aller chez la
jeune Mariée, tant elles avoient d'impatience de voir toutes les
richesses de sa Maison, n'ayant osé y venir pendant que le Mari y
estoit, à cause de sa Barbe bleuë qui leur faisoit peur. Les voilà
aussi-tost à parcourir les chambres, les cabinets, les garderobes,
toutes plus belles & plus riches les unes que les autres. Elles
monterent en suite aux gardemeubles, où elles ne pouvoient assez admirer
le nombre & la beauté des tapisseries, des lits, des sophas, des
cabinets, des gueridons, des tables & des miroirs, où l'on se voyoit
depuis les pieds jusqu'à la teste, & dont les bordures les unes de
glace, les autres d'argent, & de vermeil doré, estoient les plus belles
& les plus magnifiques qu'on eut jamais veuës: Elles ne cessoient
d'exagerer & d'envier le bon heur de leur amie, qui cependant ne se
divertissoit point à voir toutes ces richesses, à cause de l'impatience
qu'elle avoit d'aller ouvrir le cabinet de l'appartement bas. Elle fut
si pressée de sa curiosité, que sans considerer qu'il estoit malhonneste
de quitter sa compagnie, elle y descendit par un petit escalier dérobé,
& avec tant de precipitation, qu'elle pensa se rompre le cou deux ou
trois fois. Estant arrivée à la porte du cabinet, elle s'y arresta
quelque temps, songeant à la deffense que son Mari luy avoit faite, &
considerant qu'il pourrait luy arriver malheur d'avoir esté
desobeïssante; mais la tentation estoit si forte qu'elle ne put la
surmonter: elle prit donc la petite clef, & ouvrit en tremblant la porte
du cabinet. D'abord elle ne vit rien, parce que les fenestres estoient
fermées; aprés quelques momens elle commença à voir que le plancher
estoit tout couvert de sang caillé, & que dans ce sang se miroient les
corps de plusieurs femmes mortes, & attachées le long des murs. (C'étoit
toutes les femmes que la Barbe bleuë avoit épousées & qu'il avoit
égorgées l'une aprés l'autre.) Elle pensa mourir de peur, & la clef du
cabinet qu'elle venoit de retirer de la serrure luy tomba de la main:
aprés avoir un peu repris ses esprits, elle ramassa la clef, referma la
porte, & monta à sa chambre pour se remettre un peu, mais elle n'en
pouvoit venir à bout, tant elle estoit émeuë. Ayant remarqué que la clef
du cabinet étoit tachée de sang, elle l'essuia deux ou trois fois, mais
le sang ne s'en alloit point; elle eut beau la laver, & mesme la frotter
avec du sablon & avec du grais, il demeura toûjours du sang, car la clef
estait Fée, & il n'y avoit pas moyen de la nettoyer tout-à-fait: quand
on ôtoit le sang d'un costé, il revenoit de l'autre. La Barbe-bleuë
revint de son voyage dés le soir mesme, & dit qu'il avoit reçeu des
Lettres dans le chemin, qui luy avoient appris que l'affaire pour
laquelle il estoit party, venoit d'estre terminée à son avantage. Sa
femme fit tout ce qu'elle pût pour luy témoigner qu'elle estoit ravie de
son promt retour. Le lendemain il luy redemanda les clefs, & elle les
luy donna, mais d'une main si tremblante, qu'il devina sans peine tout
ce qui s'estoit passé. D'où vient, luy dit-il, que la clef du cabinet
n'est point avec les autres: il faut, dit-elle, que je l'aye laissée
là-haut sur ma table. Ne manquez pas, dit la Barbe bleuë de me la donner
tantost; aprés plusieurs remises il falut apporter la clef. La Barbe
bleuë l'ayant considerée, dit à sa femme, pourquoy y a-t-il du sang sur
cette clef? je n'en sçais rien, répondit la pauvre femme, plus pasle que
la mort: Vous n'en sçavez rien, reprit la Barbe bleuë, je le sçay bien
moy, vous avez voulu entrer dans le cabinet? Hé bien, Madame, vous y
entrerez, & irez prendre vostre place auprés des Dames que vous y avez
veuës. Elle se jetta aux pieds de son Mari, en pleurant et en luy
demandant pardon, avec toutes les marques d'un vrai repentir de n'avoir
pas esté obeissante. Elle auroit attendri un rocher, belle & affligée
comme elle estoit; mais la Barbe bleuë avoit le coeur plus dur qu'un
rocher: Il faut mourir, Madame, luy dit-il, & tout à l'heure. Puis qu'il
faut mourir, répondit-elle, en le regardant, les yeux baignez de larmes,
donnez moy un peu de temps pour prier Dieu. Je vous donne un
demy-quart-d'heure, reprit la Barbe bleüe, mais pas un moment davantage.
Lors qu'elle fut seule, elle appella sa soeur, & luy dit, ma soeur Anne,
car elle s'appelloit ainsi, monte je te prie sur le haut de la Tour,
pour voir si mes freres ne viennent point, ils m'ont promis qu'ils me
viendroient voir aujourd'huy, & si tu les vois, fais-leur signe de se
hâter. La soeur Anne monta sur le haut de la Tour, & la pauvre affligée
luy crioit de temps en temps, _Anne, ma soeur Anne, ne vois-tu rien
venir_. Et la soeur Anne luy répondoit, _je ne vois rien que le Soleil
qui poudroye, & l'herbe qui verdoye_. Cependant la Barbe bleüe tenant un
grand coutelas à sa main, crioit de toute sa force à sa femme, descens
viste, ou je monteray là-haut. Encore un moment s'il vous plaist, luy
répondoit sa femme, & aussi-tost elle crioit tout bas, _Anne, ma soeur
Anne, ne vois-tu rien venir_, & la soeur Anne répondoit, _je ne voy rien
que le Soleil qui poudroye, & l'herbe qui verdoye_. Descens donc viste,
crioit la Barbe bleuë, ou je monteray là haut. Je m'en vais, répondoit
sa femme, & puis elle crioit _Anne, ma soeur Anne, ne vois-tu rien
venir_. Je vois, répondit la soeur Anne, une grosse poussiere qui vient
de ce costé-cy. Sont-ce mes freres? Helas, non, ma soeur, c'est un
Troupeau de Moutons. Ne veux-tu pas descendre, crioit la Barbe bleuë.
Encore un moment répondoit sa femme & puis elle crioit, _Anne, ma soeur
Anne, ne vois-tu rien venir_. Je vois, répondit-elle, deux Cavaliers qui
viennent de ce costé-cy, mais il sont bien loin encore: Dieu soit loué,
s'écria-t'elle un moment aprés, ce sont mes freres; je leur fais signe
tant que je puis de se haster. La Barbe bleüe se mit à crier si fort que
toute la maison en trembla. La pauvre femme descendit, & alla se jetter
à ses pieds tout épleurée & toute échevelée: Cela ne sert de rien, dit
la Barbe bleuë, il faut mourir, puis la prenant d'une main par les
cheveux, & de l'autre levant le coutelas en l'air, il alloit luy
abbattre la teste. La pauvre femme se tournant vers luy, & le regardant
avec des yeux mourans, le pria de luy donner un petit moment pour se
recueillir: Non, non, dit-il, recommande-toy bien à Dieu; & levant son
bras.... Dans ce moment on heurta si fort à la porte, que la Barbe bleuë
s'arresta tout court: on ouvrit, & aussitost on vit entrer deux
Cavaliers, qui mettant l'épée à la main, coururent droit à la Barbe
bleüe. Il reconnut que c'étoit les freres de sa femme, l'un Dragon &
l'autre Mousquetaire, desorte qu'il s'enfuit aussi-tost pour se sauver:
mais les deux freres le poursuivirent de si prés, qu'ils l'attraperent
avant qu'il pust gagner le perron: Ils luy passerent leur épée au
travers du corps, & le laisserent mort. La pauvre femme estoit presque
aussi morte que son Mari, & n'avoit pas la force de se lever pour
embrasser ses Freres. Il se trouva que la Barbe bleüe n'avoit point
d'heritiers, & qu'ainsi sa femme demeura maîtresse de tous ses biens.
Elle en employa une partie à marier sa soeur Anne avec un jeune
Gentilhomme, dont elle estoit aimée depuis long-temps; une autre partie
à acheter des Charges de Capitaine à ses deux freres; & le reste à se
marier elle-mesme à un fort honneste homme, qui luy fit oublier le
mauvais temps qu'elle avoit passé avec la Barbe bleuë.


  MORALITÉ.

  _La curiosité malgré tous ses attraits,
        Couste souvent bien des regrets;
  On en voit tous les jours mille exemples paroistre,
  C'est, n'en déplaise au sexe, un plaisir bien leger,
      Dés qu'on le prend il cesse d'estre,
      Et toûjours il couste trop cher._

  Autre Moralité.

  _Pour peu qu'on ait l'esprit sensé,
      Et que du Monde on sçache le grimoire,
        On voit bien-tost que cette histoire
        Est un conte du temps passé;
      Il n'est plus d'Epoux si terrible,
      Ny qui demande l'impossible;
      Fut-il mal-content & jaloux,
    Prés de sa femme on le voit filer doux;
  Et de quelque couleur que sa barbe puisse estre,
  On a peine à juger qui des deux est le maistre._




  LE MAISTRE CHAT,

  OU

  LE CHAT BOTTÉ.

  _CONTE._


Un Meusnier ne laissa pour tout biens à trois enfans qu'il avoit, que
son Moulin, son Asne, & son Chat. Les partages furent bien-tôt faits, ny
le Notaire, ny le Procureur n'y furent point appellés. Ils auroient eu
bien-tost mangé tout le pauvre patrimoine. L'aisné eut le Moulin, le
second eut l'Asne, & le plus jeune n'eut que le Chat. Ce dernier ne
pouvoit se consoler d'avoir un si pauvre lot: Mes freres, disoit-il,
pourront gagner leur vie honnestement en se mettant ensemble; pour moi,
lors que j'aurai mangé mon chat, & que je me seray fait un manchon de sa
peau, il faudra que je meure de faim. Le Chat qui entendoit ce discours,
mais qui n'en fit pas semblant, luy dit dun air posé & serieux, ne vous
affligés point, mon maistre, vous n'avez qu'à me donner un Sac, & me
faire une paire de Bottes pour aller dans les brousailles, & vous verez
que vous n'êtes pas si mal partagé que vous croyez. Quoique le Maistre
du Chat ne fit pas grand fond là-dessus, il lui avoit veu faire tant de
tours de souplesse, pour prendre des Rats & des Souris; comme quand il
se pendoit par les pieds, ou qu'il se cachoit dans la farine pour faire
le mort, qu'il ne desespera pas d'en estre secouru dans sa misere.
Lorsque le chat eut ce qu'il avoit demandé, il se botta bravement; &
mettant son sac à son cou, il en prit les cordons avec ses deux pattes
de devant, & s'en alla dans une garenne où il y avoit grand nombre de
lapins. Il mit du son & des lasserons dans son sac, & s'estendant comme
s'il eut esté mort, il attendit que quelque jeune lapin, peu instruit
encore des ruses de ce monde, vint se fourer dans son sac pour manger ce
qu'il y avoit mis. A peine fut-il couché, qu'il eut contentement; un
jeune étourdi de lapin entra dans son sac, & le maistre chat tirant
aussitost les cordons le prit & le tua sans misericorde. Tout glorieux
de sa proye, il s'en alla chez le Roy & demanda à luy parler. On le fit
monter à l'Appartement de sa Majesté, où estant entré il fit une grande
reverence au Roy, & luy dit, voylà, Sire, un Lapin de Garenne que
Monsieur le Marquis de Carabas (c'estoit le nom qu'il lui prit en gré de
donner à son Maistre) m'a chargé de vous presenter de sa part. Dis à ton
Maistre, répondit le Roy, que je le remercie, & qu'il me fait plaisir.
Un autre fois il alla se cacher dans un blé tenant toûjours son sac
ouvert; & lors que deux Perdrix y furent entrées, il tira les cordons, &
les prit toutes deux. Il alla ensuite les presenter au Roy, comme il
avoit fait le Lapin de garenne. Le Roy receut encore avec plaisir les
deux Perdrix, & luy fit donner pour boire. Le chat continua ainsi
pendant deux ou trois mois à porter de temps-en-temps au Roy du Gibier
de la chasse de son Maistre. Un jour qu'il sçeut que le Roy devoit aller
à la promenade sur le bord de la riviere avec sa fille, la plus belle
Princesse du monde, il dit à son Maistre: si vous voulez suivre mon
conseil, vostre fortune est faite; vous n'avez qu'à vous baigner dans la
riviere à l'endroit que je vous montreray, & ensuite me laisser faire.
Le Marquis de Carabas fit ce que son chat lui conseilloit, sans sçavoir
à quoy cela seroit bon. Dans le temps qu'il se baignoit, le Roy vint à
passer, & le Chat se mit à crier de toute sa force: au secours, au
secours, voila Monsieur le Marquis de Carabas qui se noye. A ce cry le
Roy mit la teste à la portiere, & reconnoissant le Chat qui luy avoit
apporté tant de fois du Gibier, il ordonna à ses Gardes qu'on allast
viste au secours de Monsieur le Marquis de Carabas. Pendant qu'on
retiroit le pauvre Marquis de la riviere, le Chat s'approcha du Carosse,
& dit au Roy que dans le temps que son Maistre se baignoit, il estoit
venu des Voleurs qui avoient emporté ses habits, quoy qu'il eût crié au
voleur de toute sa force; le drosle les avoit cachez sous une grosse
pierre. Le Roy ordonna aussi-tost aux Officiers de sa Garderobbe d'aller
querir un de ses plus beaux habits pour Monsieur le Marquis de Carabas.
Le Roy luy fit mille caresses, & comme les beaux habits qu'on venoit de
luy donner relevoient sa bonne mine (car il estoit beau; & bien fait de
sa personne) la fille du Roy le trouva fort à son gré, & le Comte de
Carabas ne luy eut pas jetté deux ou trois regards fort respectueux, &
un peu tendres, qu'elle en devint amoureuse à la folie. Le Roi voulut
qu'il mõtast dans son Carosse, & qu'il fust de la promenade: Le Chat
ravi de voir que son dessein commençoit à réussir, prit les devants, &
ayant rencontré des Paysans qui fauchoient un Pré, il leur dit, _bonnes
gens qui fauchez, si vous ne dites au Roy que le pré que vous fauchez
appartient à Monsieur le Marquis de Carabas, vous serez tous hachez menu
comme chair à pasté_. Le Roy ne manqua pas à demander aux Faucheux à qui
estoit ce Pré qu'ils fauchoient. C'est à Monsieur le Marquis de Carabas,
dirent-ils tous ensemble, car la menace du Chat leur avoit fait peur.
Vous avez là un bel heritage, dit le Roy, au Marquis de Carabas. Vous
voyez, Sire, répondit le Marquis, c'est un pré qui ne manque point de
rapporter abondament toutes les années. Le maistre chat qui alloit
toûjours devant, rencontra des Moissonneurs, & leur dit, _Bonnes gens
qui moissonnez, si vous ne dites que tous ces blez appartiennent à
Monsieur le Marquis de Carabas, vouz serez tous hachez menu comme chair
à pasté_. Le Roy qui passa un moment aprés, voulut sçavoir à qui
appartenoient tous les blés qu'il voyoit. C'est à Monsieur le Marquis de
Carabas, répondirent les Moissonneurs, & le Roy s'en réjoüit encore avec
le Marquis. Le Chat qui alloit devant le Carosse, disoit toûjours la
même chose à tous ceux qu'il rencontroit; & le Roy estoit estonné des
grands biens de Monsieur le Marquis de Carabas. Le maistre Chat arriva
enfin dans un beau Château dont le Maistre estoit un Ogre, le plus riche
qu'on ait jamais veu, car toutes les terres par où le Roy avoit passé
estoient de la dépendance de ce Chasteau: le Chat qui eut soin de
s'informer qui estoit cet Ogre, & ce qu'il sçavoit faire, demanda à luy
parler, disant qu'il n'avoit pas voulu passer si prés de son Chasteau,
sans avoir l'honneur de luy faire la réverence. L'Ogre le receut aussi
civilement que le peut un Ogre, & le fit reposer. On m'a assuré, dit le
Chat, que vous aviez le don de vous changer en toute sorte d'Animaux,
que vous pouviez, par exemple, vous transformer en Lyon, en Elephant?
cela est vray, répondit l'Ogre brusquement, & pour vous le montrer, vous
m'allez voir devenir Lyon. Le Chat fut si éfrayé de voir un Lyon devant
luy, qu'il gagna aussi-tost les goûtieres, non sans peine & sans peril,
à cause de ses bottes qui ne valoient rien pour marcher sur les tuiles.
Quelque temps aprés le Chat ayant veu que l'Ogre avoit quitté sa
premiere forme, descendit, & avoüa qu'il avoit eu bien peur. On m'a
assuré encore, dit le Chat, mais je ne sçaurois le croire, que vous
aviez aussi le pouvoir de prendre la forme des plus petits Animaux, par
exemple, de vous changer en un Rat, en une souris; je vous avoüe que je
tiens cela tout à fait impossible. Impossible? réprit l'Ogre, vous allez
voir, & en même temps il se changea en une Souris qui se mit à courir
sur le plancher. Le chat ne l'eut pas plustost aperçûë, qu'il se jetta
dessus, & la mangea. Cependant le Roy qui vit en passant le beau
Chasteau de l'Ogre, voulut entrer dedans. Le Chat qui entendit le bruit
du Carosse qui passoit sur le pont levis, courut au devant, & dit au
Roy: Vostre Majesté soit la bien venuë dans le Chasteau de Monsieur le
Marquis de Carabas. Comment Monsieur le Marquis, s'écria le Roy, ce
Chasteau est encore à vous, il ne se peut rien de plus beau que cette
cour & que tous ces Bastimens qui l'environnent: voyons les dedans s'il
vous plaist. Le Marquis donna la main à la jeune Princesse, & suivant le
Roy qui montoit le premier, ils entrerent dans une grande Sale où ils
trouverent une magnifique colation que l'Ogre avoit fait preparer pour
ses amis qui le devoient venir voir ce même jour-là mais qui n'avoient
pas osé entrer, sçachant que le Roi y estoit. Le Roy charmé des bonnes
qualitez de Monsieur le Marquis de Carabas, de même que sa fille qui en
estoit folle; & voyant les grands biens qu'il possedoit, luy dit, aprés
avoir beu cinq ou six coups, il ne tiendra qu'à vous Monsieur le Marquis
que vous ne soyez mon gendre. Le Marquis faisant de grandes réverences,
accepta l'honneur que luy faisoit le Roy; & dés le même jour épousa la
Princesse. Le Chat devint grand Seigneur, & ne courut plus aprés les
souris, que pour se divertir.


  MORALITÉ.

  _Quelque grand que soit l'avantage,
      De joüir d un riche heritage
  Venant à nous de pere en fils,
  Aux jeunes gens pour l'ordinaire,
  L'industrie & le sçavoir faire,
  Vallent mieux que des biens acquis._

  Autre Moralité.

  _Si le fils d'un Meûnier, avec tant de vitesse,
      Gagne le coeur d'une Princesse,
  Et s'en fait regarder avec des yeux mourans,
    C'est que l'habit, la mine & la jeunesse,
      Pour inspirer de la tendresse,
  N'en sont pas des moyens toûjours indifférens._




  LES FÉES.

  _CONTE._


Il estoit une fois une veuve qui avoit deux filles, l'aînée luy
ressembloit si fort & d'humeur & de visage, que qui la voyoit voyait la
mere. Elles étoient toutes deux si desagreables & si orgueilleuses qu'on
ne pouvoit vivre avec elles. La cadette qui estoit le vray portrait de
son Pere pour la douceur & l'honnesteté, estoit avec cela une des plus
belles filles qu'on eust sçeu voir. Comme on aime naturellement son
semblable, cette mere estoit folle de sa fille aînée, & en même temps
avoit une aversion effroyable pour la cadette. Elle la faisoit manger à
la Cuisine & travailler sans cesse.

Il falloit entre-autre chose que cette pauvre enfant allast deux fois le
jour puiser de l'eau à une grande demy lieuë du logis, & qu'elle en
raportast plein une grande cruche. Un jour qu'elle estoit à cette
fontaine, il vint à elle une pauvre femme qui la pria de lüy donner à
boire? Ouy da, ma bonne mere, dit cette belle fille, & rinçant aussi
tost sa cruche, elle puisa de l'eau au plus bel endroit de la fontaine,
& la luy presenta, soûtenant toûjours la cruche afin qu'elle bût plus
aisément. La bonne femme ayant bû, luy dit, vous estes si belle, si
bonne, & si honneste, que je ne puis m'empêcher de vous faire un don,
(car c'estoit une Fée qui avoit pris la forme d'une pauvre femme de
village, pour voir jusqu'où iroit l'honnesteté de cette jeune fille.) Je
vous donne pour don, poursuivit la Fée, qu'à chaque parole que vous
direz, il vous sortira de la bouche ou une Fleur, ou une Pierre
précieuse. Lorsque cette belle fille arriva au logis, sa mere la gronda
de revenir si tard de la fontaine. Je vous demande pardon, ma mere, dit
cette pauvre fille, d'avoir tardé si long-temps, & en disant ces mots il
luy sortit de la bouche deux Roses, deux Perles, & deux gros Diamans.
Que voy-je-là, dit sa mere tout estonnée, je crois qu'il luy sort de la
bouche des Perles & des Diamants, d'où vient cela, ma fille, (ce fut là
la premiere fois qu'elle l'appella sa fille.) La pauvre enfant luy
raconta naïvement tout ce qui luy estoit arrivé, non sans jetter une
infinité de Diamants. Vrayment, dit la mere, il faut que j'y envoye ma
fille, tenez Fanchon, voyez ce qui sort de la bouche de vôtre soeur
quand elle parle, ne seriez-vous pas bien aise d'avoir le mesme don,
vous n'avez qu'à aller puiser de l'eau à la fontaine, & quand une pauvre
femme vous demandera à boire, luy en donner bien honnestement. Il me
feroit beau voir, répondit la brutale aller à la fontaine: Je veux que
vous y alliez, reprit la mere, & tout à l'heure. Elle y alla, mais
toûjours en grondant. Elle prit le plus beau Flacon d'argent qui fut
dans le logis. Elle ne fut pas plustost arrivée à la fontaine qu'elle
vit sortir du bois une Dame magnifiquement vestuë qui vint luy demander
à boire, c'estoit la même Fée qui avoit apparu à sa soeur, mais qui
avoit pris l'air & les habits d'une Princesse, pour voir jusqu'où iroit
la malhonnesteté de cette fille. Est-ce que je suis icy vennuë, luy dit
cette brutale orgueileuse, pour vous donner à boire, justement j'ai
apporté un Flacon d'argent tout exprés pour donner à boire à Madame?
J'en suis d'avis, beuvez à même si vous voulez. Vous n'estes guere
honneste, reprit la Fée, sans se mettre en colere: & bien, puisque vous
estes si peu obligeante, je vous donne pour don, qu'à chaque parole que
vous direz, il vous sortira de la bouche ou un serpent ou un crapau.
D'abord que sa mere l'aperçeut, elle luy cria, Hé bien ma fille! Hé
bien, ma mere, luy répondit la brutale, en jettant deux viperes, deux
crapaux. O! Ciel, s'écria la mere, que vois-je-là, c'est sa soeur qui en
est cause, elle me le payera; & aussitost elle courut pour la battre. La
pauvre enfant s'enfuit, & alla se sauver dans la Forest prochaine. Le
fils du Roi qui revenoit de la chasse, la rencontra, & la voyant si
belle, luy demanda ce qu'elle faisoit là toute seule & ce qu'elle avoit
à pleurer. Helas! Monsieur, c'est ma mere qui m'a chassée du logis. Le
fils du Roi qui vit sortir de sa bouche cinq où six Perles, & autant de
Diamants, la pria de luy dire d'où cela luy venoit. Elle luy conta toute
son avanture. Le fils du Roi en devint amoureux, considerant qu'un tel
don valoit mieux que tout ce qu'on pouvoit donner en mariage à une
autre, l'emmena au Palais du Roi son pere, où il l'épousa. Pour sa soeur
elle se fit tant haïr, que sa propre mere la chassa de chez elle; & la
malheureuse aprés avoir bien couru sans trouver personne qui voulut la
recevoir, alla mourir au coin d'un bois.


  MORALITÉ.

      _Les Diamans & les Pistoles,
        Peuvent beaucoup sur les Esprits;
      Cependant les douces paroles
  Ont encor plus de force, & sont d'un plus grand prix._

  Autre Moralité.

    _L'honnesteté couste des soins,
        Et veut un peu de complaisance,
    Mais tost ou tard elle a sa récompense,
  Et souvent dans le temps qu'on y pense le moins._




  CENDRILLON

  OU LA PETITE

  PANTOUFLE DE VERRE.

  _CONTE._


Il estoit une fois un Gentil-homme qui épousa en secondes nopces une
femme, la plus haütaine & la plus fiere qu'on eut jamais veuë. Elle
avoit deux filles de son humeur, & qui luy ressembloient en toutes
choses. Le Mari avoit de son costé une jeune fille, mais d'une douceur &
d'une bonté sans exemple, elle tenoit cela de sa Mere, qui estoit la
meilleure personne du monde. Les nopces ne furent pas plûtost faites,
que la Belle-mere fit éclater sa mauvaise humeur, elle ne pût souffrir
les bonnes qualitez de cette jeune enfant, qui rendoient ses filles
encore plus haissables. Elle la chargea des plus viles occupations de la
Maison: c'estoit elle qui nettoyoit la vaiselle & les montées, qui
frottoit la chambre de Madame, & celles de Mesdemoiselles ses filles:
elle couchoit tout au haut de la maison dans un grenier sur une méchante
paillasse, pendant que ses soeurs estoient dans des chambres parquetées,
où elles avoient des lits des plus à la mode, & des miroirs où elles se
voyoient depuis les pieds jusqu'à la teste; la pauvre fille souffroit
tout avec patience, & n'osoit s'en plaindre à son pere qui l'auroit
grondée, parce que sa femme le gouvernoit entierement. Lors quelle avoit
fait son ouvrage, elle s'alloit mettre au coin de la cheminée, &
s'asseoir dans les cendres, ce qui faisoit qu'on l'appelloit communément
dans le logis Cucendron; la cadette qui n'estoit pas si malhonneste que
son aisnée, l'appelloit Cendrillon; cependant Cendrillon avec ses
méchans habits, ne laissoit pas d'estre cent fois plus belle que ses
soeurs, quoy que vestuës tres-magnifiquement.

Il arriva que le fils du Roi donna un bal, & qu'il en pria toutes les
personnes de qualité: nos deux Demoiselles en furent aussi priées, car
elles faisoient grande figure dans le Pays. Les voilà bien aises & bien
occupées à choisir les habits & les coëffures qui leur seïeroient le
mieux; nouvelle peine pour Cendrillon car c'estoit elle qui repassoit le
linge de ses soeurs & qui godronoit leurs manchettes: on ne parloit que
de la maniere dont on s'habilleroit. Moy, dit l'aînée, je mettray mon
habit de velours rouge & ma garniture d'Angleterre. Moy, dit la cadette,
je n'auray que ma juppe ordinaire; mais en récompense, je mettray mon
manteau à fleurs d'or, & ma barriere de diamans, qui n'est pas des plus
indifferentes. On envoya querir la bonne coëffeuse, pour dresser les
cornettes à deux rangs, & on fit acheter des mouches de la bonne
Faiseuse: elles appellerent Cendrillon pour luy demander son avis, car
elle avoit le goût bon. Cendrillon les conseilla le mieux du monde, &
s'offrit mesme à les coëffer; ce qu'elles voulurent bien. En les
coëffant, elles luy disoient, Cendrillon, serois-tu bien aise d'aller au
Bal? Helas, Mesdemoiselles, vous vous mocquez de moy, ce n'est pas là ce
qu'il me faut: tu as raison; on riroit bien, si on voyoit un Culcendron
aller au Bal. Une autre que Cendrillon les auroit coëffées de travers;
mais elle estoit bonne, & elle les coëffa parfaitement bien. Elles
furent prés de deux jours sans manger, tant elles estoient transportées
de joye: on rompit plus de douze lacets à force de les serrer pour leur
rendre la taille plus menuë, & elles estoient toûjours devant leur
miroir. Enfin l'heureux jour arriva, on partit, & Cendrillon les suivit
des yeux le plus longtems qu'elle pût; lors qu'elle ne les vit plus,
elle se mit à pleurer. Sa Maraine qui la vit toute en pleurs, luy
demanda ce qu'elle avoit: Je voudrois bien.... Je voudrois bien.... Elle
pleuroit si fort qu'elle ne pût achever: sa Maraine qui estoit Fée, luy
dit, tu voudrois bien aller au Bal, n'est-ce pas; Helas ouy, dit
Cendrillon en soûpirant: Hé bien, seras tu bonne fille, dit sa Maraine,
je t'y feray aller? Elle la mena dans sa chambre, & luy dit, va dans le
jardin & apporte-moy une citroüille: Cendrillon alla aussi-tost cueillir
la plus belle qu'elle put trouver, & la porta à sa Maraine, ne pouvant
deviner comment cette citroüille la pourroit faire aller au Bal: sa
Maraine la creusa, & n'ayant laissé que l'écorce, la frappa de sa
baguette, & la citroüille fut aussi-tost changée en un beau carosse tout
doré. Ensuite elle alla regarder dans sa sourissiere, où elle trouva six
souris toutes en vie, elle dit à Cendrillon de lever un peu la trappe de
la sourissiere, & à chaque souris qui sortoit, elle lui donnoit un coup
de sa baguette, & la souris estoit aussi-tost changée en un beau cheval;
ce qui fit un bel attelage de six chevaux, d'un beau gris de souris
pommelé: Comme elle estoit en peine de quoy elle feroit un Cocher, je
vais voir, dit Cendrillon, s'il n'y a point quelque rat dans la ratiere,
nous en ferons un Cocher: Tu as raison, dit sa Maraine, va voir:
Cendrillon luy apporta la ratiere, où il y avoit trois gros rats: La Fée
en prit un d'entre les trois, à cause de sa maîtresse barbe, & l'ayant
touché, il fut changé en un gros Cocher, qui avoit une des plus belles
moustaches qu'on ait jamais veuës. Ensuite elle luy dit, va dans le
jardin, tu y trouveras six lezards derriere l'arrosoir, apporte-les-moy,
elle ne les eut pas plûtost apportez, que la Maraine les changea en six
Laquais, qui monterent aussi-tost derriere le carosse avec leurs habits
chamarez, & qui s'y tenoient attachez, comme s'ils n'eussent fait autre
chose de toute leur vie. La Fée dit alors à Cendrillon: Hé bien, voilà
de quoy aller au bal, n'es-tu pas bien aise? Ouy, mais est ce que j'irai
comme cela avec mes vilains habits: Sa Maraine ne fit que la toucher
avec sa baguette, & en même tems ses habits furent changez en des habits
de drap d'or & d'argent, tout chamarez de pierreries: elle luy donna
ensuite une paire de pantoufles de verre, les plus jolies du monde.
Quand elle fut ainsi parée, elle monta en carosse; mais sa Maraine luy
recommanda sur toutes choses de ne pas passer minuit, l'avertissant que
si elle demeuroit au Bal un moment davantage, son carosse redeviendroit
citroüille, ses chevaux des souris, ses laquais des lezards, & que ses
vieux habits reprendroient leur premiere forme. Elle promit à sa Maraine
qu'elle ne manqueroit pas de sortir du Bal avant minuit: Elle part, ne
se sentant pas de joye. Le Fils du Roi qu'on alla avertir, qu'il venoit
d'arriver une grande Princesse qu'on ne connoissoit point, courut la
recevoir; il luy donna la main à la descente du carosse, & la mena dans
la salle où estoit la compagnie: il se fit alors un grand silence; on
cessa de danser, & les violons ne joüerent plus, tant on estoit attentif
à contempler les grandes beautez de cette inconnuë: on n'entendoit qu'un
bruit confus, ha, qu'elle est belle! le Roi même tout vieux qu'il
estoit, ne laissoit pas de la regarder, & de dire tout bas à la Reine,
qu'il y avoit long-tems qu'il n'avoit vû une si belle & si aimable
personne. Toutes les Dames estoient attentives à considerer sa coëffure
et ses habits, pour en avoir dés le lendemain de semblables, pourveu
qu'il se trouvast des étoffes assez belles, et des ouvriers assez
habiles. Le Fils du Roi la mit à la place la plus honorable, & ensuite
la prit pour la mener danser: elle dança avec tant de grace, qu'on
l'admira encore davantage. On apporta une fort belle collation, dont le
jeune Prince ne mangea point, tant il estoit occupé à la considerer.
Elle alla s'asseoir auprés de ses soeurs, & leur fit mille honnestetez:
elle leur fit part des oranges & des citrons que le Prince luy avoit
donnez; ce qui les estonna fort, car elles ne la connoissoient point.
Lorsqu'elles causoient ainsi, Cendrillon entendit sonner onze heures
trois quarts: elle fit aussi-tost une grande reverence à la compagnie, &
s'en alla le plus viste qu'elle pût. Dés qu'elle fut arrivée, elle alla
trouver sa Maraine, & aprés l'avoir remerciée, elle luy dit qu'elle
souhaiteroit bien aller encore le lendemain au Bal, parce que le Fils du
Roi l'en avoit priée. Comme elle estoit occupée à raconter à sa Maraine
tout ce qui s'étoit passé au Bal, les deux soeurs heurterent à la porte;
Cendrillon leur alla ouvrir: Que vous estes longtems à revenir, leur
dit-elle, en baillant, en se frottant les yeux, & en s'étendant comme si
elle n'eust fait que de se réveiller: elle n'avoit cependant pas eu
envie de dormir depuis qu'elles s'estoient quittées: Si tu estois venuë
au Bal, luy dit une de ses soeurs, tu ne t'y serois pas ennuyée: il y
est venu la plus belle Princesse, la plus belle qu'on puisse jamais
voir; elle nous a fait mille civilitez, elle nous a donné des oranges &
des citrons. Cendrillon ne se sentoit pas de joye: elle leur demanda le
nom de cette Princesse; mais elles luy répondirent qu'on ne la
connoissoit pas, que le Fils du Roi en estoit fort en peine, & qu'il
donneroit toutes choses au monde pour sçavoir qui elle estoit.
Cendrillon sourit & leur dit, elle estoit donc bien belle? Mon Dieu que
vous estes heureuses, ne pourrois-je point la voir? Helas! Mademoiselle
Javotte, prestez-moy votre habit jaune que vous mettez tous les jours:
vraiment, dit Mademoiselle Javotte, je suis de cet avis, prestez vostre
habit à un vilain Cucendron comme cela, il faudroit que je fusse bien
folle. Cendrillon s'attendoit bien à ce refus, & elle en fut bien aise,
car elle auroit esté grandement embarrassée si sa soeur eut bien voulu
luy prester son habit. Le lendemain les deux soeurs furent au Bal, &
Cendrillon aussi, mais encore plus parée que la premiere fois. Le Fils
du Roi fut toûjours auprés d'elle, & ne cessa de luy conter des
douceurs; la jeune Demoiselle ne s'ennuyoit point, & oublia ce que sa
Maraine luy avoit recommandé; de sorte qu'elle entendit sonner le
premier coup de minuit, lors qu'elle ne croyoit pas qui fut encore onze
heures: elle se leva & s'enfuit aussi legerement qu'auroit fait une
biche: le Prince la suivit, mais il ne pût l'attraper; elle laissa
tomber une de ses pantoufles de verre, que le prince ramassa bien
soigneusement. Cendrillon arriva chez elle bien essouflée, sans carosse,
sans laquais, & avec ses méchants habits, rien ne luy estant resté de
toute sa magnificence, qu'une de ses petites pantoufles, la pareille de
celle qu'elle avoit laissé tomber. On demanda aux Gardes de la porte du
Palais s'ils n'avoient point veu sortir une Princesse; ils dirent qu'ils
n'avoient vû sortir personne, qu'une jeune fille fort mal vestuë, & qui
avoit plus l'air d'une Paysanne que d'une Demoiselle. Quand ses deux
soeurs revinrent du Bal, Cendrillon leur demanda si elles s'estoient
encore bien diverties, & si la belle Dame y avoit esté: elles luy dirent
que oüy, mais qu'elle s'estoit enfuye lorsque minuit avoit sonné, & si
promptement qu'elle avoit laissé tomber une de ses petites pantoufles de
verre, la plus jolie du monde; que le fils du Roy l'avoit ramassée, &
qu'il n'avoit fait que la regarder pendant tout le reste du Bal, &
qu'assurément il estoit fort amoureux de la belle personne à qui
appartenoit la petite pantoufle. Elles dirent vray, car peu de jours
aprés, le fils du Roy fit publier à son de trompe, qu'il épouseroit
celle dont le pied serait bien juste à la pantoufle. On commença à
l'essayer aux Princesses, ensuite aux Duchesses, & à toute la Cour, mais
inutilement: on la porta chez les deux soeurs, qui firent tout leur
possible pour faire entrer leur pied dans la pantoufle, mais elles ne
purent en venir à bout. Cendrillon qui les regardoit, & qui reconnut sa
pantoufle, dit en riant, que je voye si elle ne me seroit pas bonne: ses
soeurs se mirent à rire & à se mocquer d'elle. Le Gentilhomme qui
faisoit l'assay de la pantoufle ayant regardé attentivement Cendrillon,
& la trouvant forte belle, dit que cela estoit juste, & qu'il avoit
ordre de l'essayer à toutes les filles: il fit asseoir Cendrillon, &
approchant la pantoufle de son petit pied, il vit qu'elle y entroit sans
peine, & qu'elle y estoit juste comme de cire. L'étonnement des deux
soeurs fut grand, mais plus grand encore quand Cendrillon tira de sa
poche l'autre petite pantoufle qu'elle mit à son pied. Là-dessus arriva
la Maraine qui ayant donné un coup de sa baguette sur les habits de
Cendrillon, les fit devenir encore plus magnifiques que tous les autres.

Alors ses deux soeurs la reconnurent pour la belle personne qu'elles
avoient veuë au Bal. Elles se jetterent à ses pieds pour luy demander
pardon de tous les mauvais traittemens qu'elles luy avoient fait
souffrir. Cendrillon les releva, & leur dit en les embrassant, qu'elle
leur pardonnoit de bon coeur, & qu'elle les prioit de l'aimer bien
toûjours. On la mena chez le jeune Prince, parée comme elle estoit: il
la trouva encore plus belle que jamais, & peu de jours aprés il
l'épousa. Cendrillon qui estoit aussi bonne que belle, fit loger ses
deux soeurs au Palais, & les maria dés le jour même à deux grands
Seigneurs de la Cour.


  MORALITÉ.

  _La beauté pour le sexe est un rare tresor,
    De l'admirer jamais on ne se lasse;
      Mais ce qu'on nomme bonne grace,
      Est sans prix, & vaut mieux encor._

  _C'est ce qu'à Cendrillon fit avoir sa Maraine,
      En la dressant, en l'instruisant,
    Tant & si bien qu'elle en fit une Reine:
  (Car ainsi sur ce Conte on va moralisant.)_

  _Belles, ce don vaut mieux que d'estre bien coëffées,
  Pour engager un coeur, pour en venir à bout,
    La bonne grace est le vrai don des Fées;
  Sans elle on ne peut rien, avec elle on peut tout._

  Autre Moralité.

      _C'est sans doute un grand avantage,
        D'avoir de l'esprit, du courage,
      De la naissance, du bon sens,
      Et d'autres semblables talens,
      Qu'on reçoit du Ciel en partage;
      Mais vous aurez beau les avoir,
  Pour vostre avancement ce seront choses vaines;
    Si vous n'avez, pour les faire valoir,
      Ou des parrains ou des maraines._




  RIQUET

  A LA HOUPPE.

  _CONTE._


Il estoit une fois une Reine qui accoucha d'un fils, si laid & si mal
fait, qu'on douta long-tems s'il avoit forme humaine. Une Fée qui se
trouva à sa naissance, asseura qu'il ne laisseroit pas d'estre aimable,
parce qu'il auroit beaucoup d'esprit; elle ajoûta même qu'il pourroit en
vertu du don qu'elle venoit de luy faire, donner autant d'esprit qu'il
en auroit, à la personne qu'il aimeroit le mieux. Tout cela consola un
peu la pauvre Reine, qui estoit bien affligée d'avoir mis au monde un si
vilain marmot. Il est vray que cet enfant ne commença pas plustost à
parler, qu'il dit mille jolies choses, & qu'il avoit dans toutes ses
actions je ne sçay quoi de si spirituel, qu'on en estoit charmé.
J'oubliois de dire qu'il vint au monde avec une petite houppe de cheveux
sur la teste, ce qui fit qu'on le nomma Riquet à la houppe, car Riquet
estoit le nom de la famille.

Au bout de sept ou huit ans la Reine d'un Royaume voisin accoucha de
deux filles, la premiere qui vint au monde estoit plus belle que le
jour: la Reine en fut si aise, qu'on apprehenda que la trop grande joye
qu'elle en avoit ne luy fit mal. La même Fée qui avoit assisté à la
naissance du petit Riquet à la houppe estoit presente, & pour moderer la
joye de la Reine, elle luy declara que cette petite Princesse n'auroit
point d'esprit, & qu'elle seroit aussi stupide qu'elle estoit belle.
Cela mortifia beaucoup la Reine; mais elle eut quelques momens aprés un
bien plus grand chagrin, car la seconde fille dont elle acoucha, se
trouva extrémement laide. Ne vous affligez point tant Madame, luy dit la
Fée; vostre fille sera récompensée d'ailleurs, & elle aura tant
d'esprit, qu'on ne s'appercevra presque pas qu'il luy manque de la
beauté. Dieu le veuille, répondit la Reine, mais n'y auroit-il point
moyen de faire avoir un peu d'esprit à l'aînée qui est si belle? Je ne
puis rien pour elle, Madame, du costé de l'esprit, luy dit la Fée, mais
je puis tout du costé de la beauté; & comme il n'y a rien que je ne
veüille faire pour vôtre satisfaction, je vais luy donner pour don, de
pouvoir rendre beau ou belle la personne qui luy plaira. A mesure que
ces deux Princesses devinrent grandes, leurs perfections crûrent aussi
avec elles, & on ne parloit par tout que de la beauté de l'aisnée, & de
l'esprit de la cadette. Il est vray aussi que leurs défauts augmenterent
beaucoup avec l'âge. La cadette enlaidissoit à veuë d'oeil, & l'aisnée
devenoit plus stupide de jour en jour. Ou elle ne répondoit rien à ce
qu'on luy demandoit, ou elle disoit une sottise. Elle estoit avec cela
si mal-adroite, qu'elle n'eust pû ranger quatre Porcelaines sur le bord
d'une cheminée sans en casser une, ny boire un verre d'eau sans en
répandre la moitié sur ses habits. Quoy que la beauté soit un grand
avantage dans une jeune personne, cependant la cadette l'emportoit
presque toûjours sur son aînée dans toutes les Compagnies. D'abord on
alloit du costé de la plus belle pour la voir & pour l'admirer, mais
bien tost aprés, on alloit à celle qui avoit le plus d'esprit, pour luy
entendre dire mille choses agreables; & on estoit estonné qu'en moins
d'un quart d'heure l'aînée n'avoit plus personne auprés d'elle, & que
tout le monde s'estoit rangé autour de la cadette. L'aisnée quoyque fort
stupide, le remarqua bien, & elle eut donné sans regret toute sa beauté
pour avoir la moitié de l'esprit de sa soeur. La Reine toute sage
qu'elle estoit, ne pût s'empêcher de luy reprocher plusieurs fois sa
bestise, ce qui pensa faire mourir de douleur cette pauvre Princesse. Un
jour qu'elle s'estoit retirée dans un bois pour y plaindre son malheur,
elle vit venir à elle un petit homme fort laid & fort desagreable, mais
vestu tres-magnifiquement. C'estoit le jeune Prince Riquet à la houppe,
qui estant devenu amoureux d'elle sur ses Portraits qui courroient par
tout le monde, avoit quitté le Royaume de son pere pour avoir le plaisir
de la voir et de luy parler. Ravi de la rencontrer ainsi toute seule, il
l'aborde avec tout le respect & toute la politesse imaginable. Ayant
remarqué aprés luy avoir fait les complimens ordinaires, qu'elle estoit
fort melancolique, il luy dit; je ne comprens point, Madame, comment une
personne aussi belle que vous l'estes, peut estre aussi triste que vous
le paroissez; car quoyque je puisse me vanter d'avoir veu une infinité
de belles personnes, je puis dire que je n'en ay jamais vû dont la
beauté aproche de la vostre. Cela vous plaist à dire, Monsieur, luy
répondit la Princesse, & en demeure là. La beauté, reprit Riquet à la
houppe, est un si grand avantage qu'il doit tenir lieu de tout le reste;
& quand on le possede, je ne voy pas qu'il y ait rien qui puisse nous
affliger beaucoup. J'aimerois mieux, dit la Princesse, estre aussi laide
que vous & avoir de l'esprit, que d'avoir de la beauté comme j'en ay, &
estre beste autant que je le suis. Il n'y a rien, Madame, qui marque
davantage qu'on a de l'esprit, que de croire n'en pas avoir, & il est de
la nature de ce bien là, que plus on en a, plus on croit en manquer. Je
ne sçay pas cela, dit la Princesse, mais je sçay bien que je suis fort
beste, & c'est de là que vient le chagrin qui me tuë. Si ce n'est que
cela, Madame, qui vous afflige, je puis aisément mettre fin à vostre
douleur. Et comment ferez-vous, dit la Princesse; J'ay le pouvoir,
Madame, dit Riquet à la houppe, de donner de l'esprit autant qu'on en
sçauroit avoir à la personne que je dois aimer le plus; & comme vous
estes, Madame, cette personne, il ne tiendra qu'à vous que vous n'ayez
autant d'esprit qu'on en peut avoir, pourvû que vous vouliez bien
m'épouser. La Princesse demeura toute interdite, & ne répondit rien. Je
voy, reprit Riquet à la houppe, que cette proposition vous fait de la
peine, & je ne m'en estonne pas; mais je vous donne un an tout entier
pour vous y resoudre. La Princesse avoit si peu d'esprit, & en même
temps une si grande envie d'en avoir, qu'elle s'imagina que la fin de
cette année ne viendroit jamais; de sorte qu'elle accepta la proposition
qui luy estoit faite. Elle n'eut pas plustost promis à Riquet à la
houppe, qu'elle l'épouseroit dans un an à pareil jour, qu'elle se sentit
tout autre qu'elle n'estoit auparavant; elle se trouva une facilité
incroyable à dire tout ce qui luy plaisoit, & à le dire d'une maniere
fine, aisée et naturelle: elle commença dés ce moment une conversation
galante, & soutenuë avec Riquet à la houppe, où elle brilla d'une telle
force, que Riquet à la houppe crut luy avoir donné plus d'esprit qu'il
ne s'en estoit reservé pour luy-même. Quand elle fut retournée au
Palais, toute la Cour ne sçavoit que penser d'un changement si subit &
si extraordinaire, car autant qu'on luy avoit oüy dire d'impertinences
auparavant, autant luy entendoit-on dire des choses bien sensées &
infiniment spirituelles. Toute la Cour en eut une joye qui ne se peut
imaginer, il n'y eut que sa cadette qui n'en fut pas bien aise, parce
que n'ayant plus sur son aînée l'avantage de l'esprit, elle ne
paroissoit plus auprés d'elle qu'une Guenon fort desagreable. Le Roi se
conduisoit par ses avis, & alloit même quelquefois tenir le Conseil dans
son Appartement. Le bruit de ce changement s'estant répandu, tous les
jeunes Princes des Royaumes voisins firent leurs efforts pour s'en faire
aimer, & presque tous la demanderent en Mariage; mais elle n'en trouvoit
point qui eust assez d'esprit, & elle les écoutoit tous sans s'engager à
pas un d'eux. Cependant il en vint un si puissant, si riche, si
spirituel & si bien fait, qu'elle ne pust s'empêcher d'avoir de la bonne
volonté pour luy. Son pere s'en estant apperçeu, luy dit qu'il la
faisoit la maistresse sur le choix d'un Epoux, & qu'elle n'avoit qu'à se
déclarer. Comme plus on a d'esprit, & plus on a de peine à prendre une
ferme resolution sur cette affaire, elle demanda, aprés avoir remercié
son pere, qu'il luy donnast du temps pour y penser. Elle alla par hazard
se promener dans le même bois où elle avoit trouvé Riquet à la houppe,
pour rêver plus commodement à ce qu'elle avoit à faire. Dans le tems
qu'elle se promenoit, rêvant profondement, elle entendit un bruit sourd
sous ses pieds, comme de plusieurs personnes qui vont & viennent & qui
agissent. Ayant presté l'oreille plus attentivement, elle ouït que l'un
disoit apporte-moy cette marmite, l'autre donne-moy cette chaudiere,
l'autre mets du bois dans ce feu. La terre s'ouvrit dans le même temps,
& elle vit sous ses pieds comme une grande Cuisine pleine de Cuisiniers,
de Marmitons & de toutes sortes d'Officiers necessaires pour faire un
festin magnifique. Il en sortit une bande de vingt ou trente Rotisseurs,
qui allerent se camper dans une allée du bois autour d'une table fort
longue, & qui tous, la lardoire à la main, & la queuë de Renard sur
l'oreille, se mirent à travailler en cadence au son d'une Chanson
harmonieuse. La Princesse estonnée de ce spectacle, leur demanda pour
qui ils travailloient. C'est, Madame, luy répondit le plus apparent de
la bande, pour le Prince Riquet à la houppe, dont les nopces se feront
demain. La Princesse encore plus surprise qu'elle ne l'avoit esté, & se
resouvenant tout à coup qu'il y avoit un an qu'à pareil jour, elle avoit
promis d'épouser le Prince Riquet à la houppe, elle pensa tomber de son
haut. Ce qui faisoit qu'elle ne s'en souvenoit pas, c'est que quand elle
fit cette promesse, elle estoit une bête, & qu'en prenant le nouvel
esprit que le Prince luy avoit donné, elle avoit oublié toutes ses
sottises. Elle n'eut pas fait trente pas en continuant sa promenade, que
Riquet à la houppe se presenta à elle, brave, magnifique, & comme un
Prince qui va se marier. Vous me voyez, dit-il, Madame, exact à tenir ma
parole, & je ne doute point que vous ne veniez ici pour executer la
vostre, & me rendre, en me donnant la main, le plus heureux de tous les
hommes. Je vous avoüeray franchement, répondit la Princesse, que je n'ay
pas encore pris ma resolution là-dessus, & que je ne croy pas pouvoir
jamais la prendre telle que vous la soühaitez. Vous m'étonnez, Madame,
lui dit Riquet à la houppe: Je le croy, dit la Princesse, & assurément
si j'avois affaire à un brutal, à un homme sans esprit, je me trouverais
bien embarassée. Une Princesse n'a que sa parole, me diroit-il, & il
faut que vous m'épousiez, puisque vous me l'avez promis; mais comme
celuy à qui je parle est l'homme du monde qui a le plus d'esprit, je
suis seure qu'il entendra raison. Vous sçavez que quand je n'estois
qu'une beste, je ne pouvois neanmoins me resoudre à vous épouser,
comment voulez-vous qu'ayant l'esprit que vous m'avez donné, qui me rend
encore plus difficile en gens que je n'estois, je prenne aujourd'huy une
résolution que je n'ay pû prendre dans ce temps-là. Si vous pensiez tout
de bon à m'épouser, vous avez eu grand tort de m'oster ma bestise, & de
me faire voir plus clair que je ne voyois. Si un homme sans esprit,
répondit Riquet à la houppe, serait bien reçeu, comme vous venez de le
dire, à vous reprocher vostre manque de parole, pourquoi voulez-vous,
Madame, que je n'en use pas de mesme, dans une chose où il y va de tout
le bonheur de ma vie; est-il raisonnable que les personnes qui ont de
l'esprit, soient d'une pire condition que ceux qui n'en ont pas; le
pouvez-vous prétendre, vous qui en avez tant, & qui avez tant souhaité
d'en avoir? mais venons au fait, s'il vous plaist: A la reserve de ma
laideur, y a-t'il quelque chose en moy qui vous déplaise, estes-vous
malcontente de ma naissance, de mon esprit, de mon humeur, & de mes
manieres? Nullement, répondit la Princesse, j'aime en vous tout ce que
vous venez de me dire. Si cela est ainsi, reprit Riquet à la houppe, je
vais estre heureux, puisque vous pouvez me rendre le plus aimable de
tous les hommes. Comment cela se peut-il faire? luy dit la Princesse.
Cela se fera, répondit Riquet à la houppe, si vous m'aimez assez pour
souhaiter que cela soit; & afin, Madame, que vous n'en doutiez pas,
sçachez que la même Fée qui au jour de ma naissance me fit le don de
pouvoir rendre spirituelle la personne qu'il me plairoit, vous a aussi
fait le don de pouvoir rendre beau celuy que vous aimerez, & à qui vous
voudrez bien faire cette faveur. Si la chose est ainsi, dit la
Princesse, je souhaite de tout mon coeur que vous deveniez le Prince du
monde le plus beau & le plus aimable; & je vous en fais le don autant
qu'il est en moy. La Princesse n'eut pas plustost prononcé ces paroles,
que Riquet à la houppe parut à ses yeux, l'homme du monde le plus beau,
le mieux fait, & le plus aimable quelle eust jamais vû. Quelques-uns
asseurent que ce ne furent point les charmes de la Fée qui opererent,
mais que l'amour seul fit cette Metamorphose. Ils disent que la
Princesse ayant fait reflexion sur la perseverance de son Amant, sur sa
discretion, & sur toutes les bonnes qualitez de son ame & de son esprit,
ne vit plus la difformité de son corps, ny la laideur de son visage, que
sa bosse ne luy sembla plus que le bon air d'un homme qui fait le gros
dos; & qu'au lieu que jusqu'à lors elle l'avoit vû boiter
effroyablement, elle ne luy trouva plus qu'un certain air penché qui la
charmoit; ils disent encore que ses yeux qui estoient louches, ne luy en
parurent que plus brillans, que leur déreglement passa dans son esprit
pour la marque d'un violent excez d'amour, & qu'enfin son gros nez rouge
eut pour elle quelque chose de Martial et d'Heroïque. Quoyqu'il en soit,
la Princesse luy promit sur le champ de l'épouser, pourvû qu'il en
obtint le consentement du Roy son Père. Le Roy ayant sçû que sa fille
avoit beaucoup d'estime pour Riquet à la houppe, qu'il connoissoit
d'ailleurs pour un Prince tres-spirituel & tres-sage, le receut avec
plaisir pour son gendre. Dés le lendemain les nopces furent faites,
ainsi que Riquet à la houppe l'avoit prévû, & selon les ordres qu'il en
avoit donnez longtemps auparavant.


  MORALITÉ.

  _Ce que l'on voit dans cet écrit,
  Est moins un conte en l'air que la verité même;
  Tout est beau dans ce que l'on aime,
  Tout ce qu'on aime a de l'esprit._


  Autre Moralité.

      _Dans un objet où la Nature,
        Aura mis de beaux traits, & la vive peinture
    D'un teint où jamais l'Art ne sçauroit arriver,
  Tous ces dons pourront moins pour rendre un coeur sensible,
      Qu'un seul agrément invisible,
      Que l'Amour y fera trouver._




  LE PETIT

  POUCET

  _CONTE._


Il estoit une fois un Bucheron & une Bucheronne, qui avoient sept enfans
tous Garçons. L'aîné n'avoit que dix ans, & le plus jeune n'en avoit que
sept. On s'estonnera que le Bucheron ait eu tant d'enfans en si peu de
temps; mais c'est que sa femme alloit viste en besongne, & n'en faisoit
pas moins que deux à la fois. Ils estoient fort pauvres, & leur sept
enfans les incommodoient beaucoup, parce qu'aucun d'eux ne pouvoit
encore gagner sa vie. Ce qui les chagrinoit encore, c'est que le plus
jeune estoit fort delicat, & ne disoit mot, prenant pour bestise, ce qui
estoit une marque de la bonté de son esprit: il estoit fort petit, &
quand il vint au monde il n'estoit gueres plus gros que le pouce, ce qui
fit que l'on l'appella le petit Poucet. Ce pauvre enfant estoit le
souffre douleurs de la maison, & on luy donnoit toûjours le tort.
Cependant il estoit le plus fin, & le plus avisé de tous ses freres, &
s'il parloit peu, il écoutait beaucoup. Il vint une année tres-fâcheuse,
& la famine fut si grande, que ces pauvres gens resolurent de se
deffaire de leurs enfans. Un soir que ces enfans estoient couchez, & que
le Bucheron estoit auprés du feu avec sa femme, il luy dit, le coeur
serré de douleur? Tu vois bien que nous ne pouvons plus nourir nos
enfans: je ne sçaurois les voir mourir de faim devant mes yeux, & je
suis resolu de les mener perdre demain au bois, ce qui sera bien aisé,
car tandis qu'ils s'amuseront à fagoter, nous n'avons qu'à nous enfuir
sans qu'ils nous voyent. Ah! s'écria la Bucheronne, pourrois-tu bien
toy-même mener perdre tes enfans? Son mary avoit beau luy representer
leur grande pauvreté, elle ne pouvoit y consentir; elle estoit pauvre,
mais elle estoit leur mere: Cependant ayant consideré quelle douleur ce
luy seroit de les voir mourir de faim, elle y consentit, & alla se
coucher en pleurant. Le petit Poucet oüit tout ce qu'ils dirent, car
ayant entendu de dedans son lit qu'ils parloient d'affaires, il s'estoit
levé doucement, & s'estoit glissé sous l'escabelle de son pere pour les
écouter sans estre vû. Il alla se recoucher & ne dormit point le reste
de la nuit, songeant à ce qu'il avoit à faire. Il se leva de bon matin,
& alla au bord d'un ruisseau, où il emplit ses poches de petits cailloux
blancs, & ensuite revint à la maison. On partit, & le petit Poucet ne
découvrit rien de tout ce qu'il sçavoit à ses freres. Ils allerent dans
une forest fort épaisse, où à dix pas de distance on ne se voyoit pas
l'un l'autre. Le Bucheron se mit à couper du bois & ses enfans à
ramasser les broutilles pour faire des fagots. Le pere & la mere les
voyant ocupez à travailler, s'éloignerent d'eux insensiblement, & puis
s'enfuirent tout à coup par un petit sentier détourné. Lors que ces
enfans se virent seuls, ils se mirent à crier & à pleurer de toute leur
force. Le petit Poucet les laissoit crier, sçachant bien par où il
reviendroit à la maison; car en marchant il avoit laissé tomber le long
du chemin les petits cailloux blancs qu'il avoit dans ses poches. Il
leur dit donc, ne craignez-point mes freres, mon Pere & ma Mere nous ont
laissez icy, mais je vous remeneray bien au logis, suivez-moy seulement,
ils le suivirent, & il les mena jusqu'à leur maison par le même chemin
qu'ils estoient venus dans la forest. Ils n'oserent d'abord entrer, mais
ils se mirent tous contre la porte pour écouter ce que disoient leur
Pere & leur Mere.

Dans le moment que le Bucheron & la Bucheronne arriverent chez eux, le
Seigneur du Village leur envoya dix écus qu'il leur devoit il y avoit
longtems, & dont ils n'esperoient plus rien: Cela leur redonna la vie,
car les pauvres gens mouroient de faim. Le Bucheron envoya sur l'heure
sa femme à la Boucherie. Comme il y avoit long-temps qu'elle n'avoit
mangé, elle acheta trois fois plus de viande qu'il n'en falloit pour le
souper de deux personnes. Lors qu'ils furent rassassiez; la Bucheronne
dit, helas, où sont maintenant nos pauvres enfans, ils feroient bonne
chere de ce qui nous reste là: Mais aussi Guillaume, c'est toy qui les
as voulu perdre, j'avois bien dit que nous nous en repentirions, que
font-ils maintenant dans cette Forest? Helas! mon Dieu, les Loups les
ont peut être déjà mangez; tu es bien inhumain d'avoir perdu ainsi tes
enfans. Le Bucheron s'impatienta à la fin, car elle redit plus de vingt
fois qu'ils s'en repentiroient & qu'elle l'avoit bien dit. Il la menaça
de la battre si elle ne se taisoit. Ce n'est pas que le Bucheron ne fust
peut-estre encore plus fâché que sa femme, mais c'est qu'elle luy
rompoit la teste, & qu'il estoit de l'humeur de beaucoup d'autres gens,
qui ayment fort les femmes qui disent bien, mais qui trouvent trés
importunes celles qui ont toûjours bien dit. La Bucheronne estoit toute
en pleurs? Helas! où sont maintenant mes enfans, mes pauvres enfans?
Elle le dit une fois si haut que les enfans qui étoient à la porte
l'ayant entendu, se mirent à crier tous ensemble, nous voyla, nous
voyla. Elle courut viste leur ouvrir la porte, & leur dit en les
embrassant, que je suis aise de vous revoir, mes chers enfans, vous
estes bien las, & vous avez bien faim; & toy Pierrot comme te voylà
crotté, vien que je te débarboüille. Ce Pierrot estoit son fils aîné
qu'elle aimoit plus que tous les autres, parce qu'il estoit un peu
rousseau, & qu'elle estoit un peu rousse. Ils se mirent à Table, &
mangerent d'un apetit qui faisoit plaisir au Pere & à la Mere, à qui ils
racontoient la peur qu'ils avoient euë dans la Forest en parlant presque
toûjours tous ensemble: Ces bonnes gens étoient ravis de revoir leurs
enfans avec eux, & cette joye dura tant que les dix écus durerent; mais
lors que l'argent fut dépensé ils retomberent dans leur premier chagrin;
& résolurent de les perdre encore, & pour ne pas manquer leur coup, de
les mener bien plus loin que la premiere fois. Ils ne purent parler de
cela si secrettement qu'ils ne fussent entendus par le petit Poucet, qui
fit son compte de sortir d'affaire comme il avoit déjà fait; mais quoy
qu'il se fut levé de bon matin pour aller ramasser des petits cailloux,
il ne put en venir à bout, car il trouva la porte de la maison fermée à
double tour. Il ne sçavoit que faire lors que la Bucheronne leur ayant
donné à chacun un morceau de pain pour leur déjeuné, il songea qu'il
pourroit se servir de son pain au lieu de cailloux en le jettant par
miettes le long des chemins où ils passeroient, il le serra donc dans sa
poche. Le Pere & la Mere les menerent dans l'endroit de la Forest le
plus épais & le plus obscur, & dés qu'ils y furent ils gagnerent un faux
fuyant & les laisserent là. Le petit Pouçet ne s'en chagrina pas
beaucoup, parce qu'il croyait retrouver aisément son chemin par le moyen
de son pain qu'il avoit semé par tout où il avoit passé; mais il fut
bien supris lors qu'il ne put en retrouver une seule miette, les Oiseaux
étoient venus qui avoient tout mangé. Les voyla donc bien affligés, car
plus ils marchoient plus ils s'égaroient, & s'enfonçoient dans la
Forest. La nuit vint, & il s'éleva un grand vent qui leur faisoit des
peurs épouventables. Ils croyoient n'entendre de tous côtés que les
heurlemens de Loups qui venoient à eux pour les manger. Ils n'osoient
presque se parler ny tourner la teste. Il survint une grosse pluye qui
les perça jusqu'aux os; ils glissoient à chaque pas & tomboient dans la
boüe, d'où ils se relevoient tout crottés, ne sçachant que faire de
leurs mains. Le petit Pouçet grimpa au haut d'un Arbre pour voir s'il ne
découvriroit rien; ayant tourné la teste de tous costés, il vit une
petite lueur comme d'une chandelle, mais qui estoit bien loin par de-là
la Forest. Il descendit de l'arbre; & lors qu'il fut à terre il ne vit
plus rien; cela le desola. Cependant ayant marché quelque temps avec ses
freres du costé qu'il avoit veu la lumiere, il la revit en sortant du
Bois. Ils arriverent enfin à la maison où estoit cette chandelle, non
sans bien des frayeurs, car souvent ils la perdoient de veuë, ce qui
leur arrivoit toutes les fois qu'ils descendoient dans quelques fonds.
Ils heurterent à la porte, & une bonne femme vint leur ouvrir. Elle leur
demanda ce qu'ils vouloient, le petit Pouçet luy dit, qu'ils étoient de
pauvres enfans qui s'estoient perdus dans la Forest, & qui demandoient à
coucher par charité. Cette femme les voyant tous si jolis se mit à
pleurer, & leur dit, helas! mes pauvres enfans, où estes vous venus?
sçavez vous bien que c'est icy la maison d'un Ogre qui mange les petits
enfans. Helas! Madame, luy répondit le petit Pouçet, qui trembloit de
toute sa force aussi bien que ses freres; que ferons-nous? Il est bien
seur que les Loups de la Forest ne manqueront pas de nous manger cette
nuit, si vous ne voulez pas nous retirer chez vous. Et cela étant nous
aimons mieux que ce soit Monsieur qui nous mange, peut-estre qu'il aura
pitié de nous, si vous voulez bien l'en prier. La femme de l'Ogre qui
crut qu'elle pourroit les cacher à son mary jusqu'au lendemain matin,
les laissa entrer & les mena se chauffer auprés d'un bon feu, car il y
avoit un Mouton tout entier à la broche pour le soupé de l'Ogre. Comme
ils commençoient à se chauffer ils entendirent heurter trois ou quartre
grands coups à la porte, c'estoit l'Ogre qui revenoit. Aussi-tost sa
femme les fit cacher sous le lit, & alla ouvrir la porte. L'Ogre demanda
d'abord si le soupé estoit prest, & si on avoit tiré du vin, &
aussi-tost se mit à table. Le Mouton estoit encore tout sanglant, mais
il ne luy en sembla que meilleur. Il fleuroit à droite & à gauche,
disant qu'il sentoit la chair fraîche. Il faut luy dit sa femme, que ce
soit ce Veau que je viens d'habiller que vous sentez. Je sens la chair
fraîche, te dis-je encore une fois, reprit l'Ogre, en regardant sa femme
de travers, & il y a icy quelque chose que je n'entens pas; en disant
ces mots, il se leva de Table, & alla droit au lit. Ah, dit il, voila
donc comme tu veux me tromper maudite femme, je ne sçais à quoy il tient
que je ne te mange aussi; bien t'en prend d'être une vieille beste.
Voila du Gibier qui me vient bien à propos pour traiter trois Ogres de
mes amis qui doivent me venir voir ces jours icy. Il les tira de dessous
le lit l'un aprés l'autre. Ces pauvres enfans se mirent à genoux en luy
demandant pardon, mais ils avoient à faire au plus cruël de tous les
Ogres, qui bien loin d'avoir de la pitié les dévoroit déjà des yeux, &
disoit à sa femme que ce seroit là de friands morceaux lors qu'elle leur
auroit fait une bonne sausse. Il alla prendre un grand Couteau, & en
approchant de ces pauvres enfans, il l'aiguisoit sur une longue pierre
qu'il tenoit à sa main gauche. Il en avoit déja empoigné un, lorsque sa
femme luy dit, que voulez vous faire à l'heure qu'il est, n'aurez-vous
pas assez de temps demain matin? Tay-toy, reprit l'Ogre, ils en seront
plus mortifiés. Mais vous avez encore là tant de viande, reprit sa
femme, voilà un Veau, deux Moutons & la moitié d'un Cochon. Tu as raison
dit l'Ogre, donne leur bien à souper affin qu'il ne maigrissent pas, &
va les mener coucher. La bonne femme fut ravie de joye, & leur porta
bien à souper, mais ils ne purent manger tant ils étoient saisis de
peur. Pour l'Ogre il se remit à boire, ravi d'avoir de quoy si bien
regaler ses Amis. Il but une douzaine de coups plus qu'à l'ordinaire, ce
qui luy donna un peu dans la teste, & l'obligea de s'aller coucher.

L'Ogre avoit sept filles qui n'étoient encore que des enfans. Ces
petites Ogresses avoient toutes le teint fort beau, parce qu'elles
mangeoient de la chair fraîche comme leur pere; mais elles avoient de
petits yeux gris & tout ronds, le nez crochu & une fort grande bouche
avec de longues dents fort aiguës & fort éloignées l'une de l'autre.
Elles n'estoient pas encore fort méchantes; mais elles promettoient
beaucoup, car elles mordoient déja les petits enfans pour en succer le
sang. On les avoit fait coucher de bonne heure, & elles estoient toutes
sept dans un grand lit, ayant chacune une Couronne d'or sur la teste. Il
y avoit dans la même Chambre un autre lit de la même grandeur; ce fut
dans ce lit que la femme de l'Ogre mit coucher les sept petits garçons,
aprés quoi elle s'alla coucher auprés de son mary. Le petit Poucet qui
avoit remarqué que les filles de l'Ogre avoient des Couronnes d'or sur
la teste, & qui craignoit qu'il ne prit à l'Ogre quelques remords de ne
les avoir pas égorgés dés le soir même, se leva vers le milieu de la
nuit, & prenant les bonnets de ses freres & le sien, il alla tout
doucement les mettre sur la teste des sept filles de l'Ogre aprés leur
avoir osté leurs Couronnes d'or qu'il mit sur la teste de ses freres &
sur la sienne, afin que l'Ogre les prit pour ses filles, & ses filles
pour les garçons qu'il vouloit égorger. La chose réüssit comme il
l'avoit pensé; car l'Ogre s'étant éveillé sur le minuit, eut regret
d'avoir differé au lendemain ce qu'il pouvoit executer la veille, il se
jetta donc brusquement hors du lit, & prenant son grand Couteau, allons
voir, dit il, comment se portent nos petits drolles, n'en faisons pas à
deux fois; il monta donc à tâtons à la Chambre de ses filles &
s'approcha du lit où étoient les petits garçons, qui dormoient tous
excepté le petit Pouçet, qui eut bien peur lors qu'il sentit la main de
l'Ogre qui luy tastoit la teste, comme il avoit tasté celle de tous ses
freres. L'Ogre qui sentit les Couronnes d'or; vrayment, dit il, j'allois
faire là un bel ouvrage, je voy bien que je bus trop hier au soir. Il
alla ensuite au lit de ses filles où ayant senti les petits bonnets des
garçons. Ah, les voilà, dit-il nos gaillards? Travaillons hardiment; en
disant ses mots, il coupa sans balancer la gorge à ses sept filles. Fort
content de cette expedition, il alla se recoucher auprés de sa femme.
Aussi-tost que le petit Poucet entendit ronfler l'Ogre, il reveilla ses
frères, & leur dit de s'habiller promptement & de le suivre. Ils
descendirent doucement dans le Jardin, & sauterent par dessus les
murailles. Ils coururent presque toute la nuit, toûjours en tremblant &
sans sçavoir où ils alloient. L'Ogre s'estant éveillé dit à sa femme,
va-t'en là haut habiller ces petits droles d'hier au soir; l'Ogresse fût
fort estonnée de la bonté de son mary, ne se doutant point de la maniere
qu'il entendoit qu'elle les habillast, & croyant qu'il luy ordonnoit de
les aller vestir, elle monta en haut où elle fut bien surprise
lorsqu'elle aperçût ses sept filles égorgées & nageant dans leur sang.
Elle commença par s'évanoüir (car c'est le premier expedient que
trouvent presque toutes les femmes en pareilles rencontres.) L'Ogre
craignant que sa femme ne fût trop longtemps à faire la besongne dont il
l'avoit chargée, monta en haut pour luy aider. Il ne fut pas moins
estonné que sa femme lors qu'il vit cet affreux spectacle. Ah, qu'ay-je
fait, s'écria-t-il, ils me le payeront les malheureux, & tout à l'heure.
Il jetta aussi-tost une potée d'eau dans le nez de sa femme, & l'ayant
fait revenir, donne-moy viste mes bottes de sept lieuës, luy dit-il,
afin que j'aille les attraper. Il se mit en campagne, & aprés avoir
couru bien loin de tous costés, enfin il entra dans le chemin où
marchoient ces pauvres enfans qui n'étoient plus qu'à cent pas du logis
de leur pere. Ils virent l'Ogre qui alloit de montagne en montagne, &
qui traversoit des rivieres aussi aisément qu'il auroit fait le moindre
ruisseau. Le petit Poucet qui vit un Rocher creux proche le lieu où ils
estoient, y fit cacher ses six freres, & s'y fourra aussi, regardant
toûjours ce que l'Ogre deviendroit. L'Ogre qui se trouvoit fort las du
long chemin qu'il avoit fait inutilement, (car les bottes de sept lieues
fatiguent fort leur homme,) voulut se reposer, & par hazard il alla
s'asseoir sur la roche où les petits garçons s'estoient cachez. Comme il
n'en pouvoit plus de fatigue, il s'endormit aprés s'estre reposé quelque
temps; & vint à ronfler si effroyablement, que les pauvres enfans n'en
eurent pas moins de peur, que quand il tenoit son grand Couteau pour
leur couper la gorge. Le petit Poucet en eut moins de peur, & dit à ses
freres de s'enfuir promptement à la maison, pendant que l'Ogre dormoit
bien fort, & qu'ils ne se missent point en peine de luy. Ils crurent son
conseil & gagnerent viste la maison. Le petit Poucet s'estant approché
de l'Ogre, luy tira doucement ses bottes, & les mit aussi-tost; les
bottes estoient fort grandes & fort larges; mais comme elles estoient
Fées, elles avoient le don de s'agrandir & de s'appetisser selon la
jambe de celuy qui les chaussoit, de sorte qu'elles se trouverent aussi
justes à ses pieds & à ses jambes que si elles avoient esté faites pour
luy. Il alla droit à la maison de l'Ogre où il trouva sa femme qui
pleuroit auprés de ses filles égorgées. Vostre mari, luy dit le petit
Poucet, est en grand danger, car il a esté pris par une troupe de
Voleurs qui out juré de le tuër s'il ne leur donne tout son or & tout
son argent. Dans le moment qu'ils luy tenoient le poignard sur la gorge,
il m'a aperceu & m'a prié de vous venir avertir de l'estat où il est, &
de vous dire de me donner tout ce qu'il a vaillant sans en rien retenir,
parcequ'autrement ils le tuëront sans misericorde: Comme la chose presse
beaucoup, il a voulu que je prisse ses bottes de sept lieuës que voilà
pour faire diligence, & aussi afin que vous ne croyez pas que je sois un
affronteur. La bonne femme fort effrayée luy donna aussi-tost tout ce
qu'elle avoit; car cet Ogre ne laissoit pas d'estre fort bon mari, quoy
qu'il mangeast les petits enfans. Le petit Poucet estant donc chargé de
toutes les richesses de l'Ogre s'en revint au logis de son pere, où il
fut receu avec bien de la joye.

Il y a bien des gens qui ne demeurent pas d'acord de cette derniere
circonstance, & qui prétendent que le petit Poucet n'a jamais fait ce
vol à l'Ogre; qu'à la verité, il n'avoit pas fait conscience de luy
prendre ses bottes de sept lieües, parce qu'il ne s'en servoit que pour
courir aprés les petits enfans. Ces gens-là asseurent le sçavoir de
bonne part, & même pour avoir bû & mangé dans la maison du Bucheron. Ils
assurent que lorsque le petit Poucet eut chaussé les bottes de l'Ogre,
il s'en alla à la Cour, où il sçavoit qu'on estoit fort en peine d'une
Armée, qui étoit à deux cens lieües de-là, & du succés d'une Bataille
qu'on avoit donnée. Il alla, disent-ils, trouver le Roi, & luy dit que
s'il le souhaitoit, il luy rapporteroit des nouvelles de l'Armée avant
la fin du jour. Le Roi luy promit une grosse somme d'argent s'il en
venoit à bout. Le petit Poucet rapporta des nouvelles dés le soir même,
& cette premiere course l'ayant fait connoître, il gagnoit tout ce qu'il
vouloit; car le Roi le payoit parfaitement bien pour porter ses ordres à
l'Armée, & une infinité de Dames luy donnoient tout ce qu'il vouloit
pour avoir des nouvelles de leurs Amans, & ce fut là son plus grand
gain. Il se trouvoit quelques femmes qui le chargeoient de Lettres pour
leur maris, mais elles le payoient si mal, & cela alloit à si peu de
chose, qu'il ne daignoit mettre en ligne de compte ce qu'il gagnoit de
ce côté-là. Aprés avoir fait pendant quelque temps le mêtier de courier,
& y avoir amassé beaucoup de bien, il revint chez son pere, où il n'est
pas possible d'imaginer la joye qu'on eut de le revoir. Il mit toute sa
famille à son aise. Il achepta des Offices de nouvelle création pour son
pere & pour ses freres; & par là il les établit tous, & fit parfaitement
bien sa Cour en même-temps.


  MORALITÉ.

  _On ne s'afflige point d'avoir beaucoup d'enfans,
      Quand ils sont tous beaux, bien-faits & bien grands,
      Et d'un exterieur qui brille;
    Mais si l'un d'eux est foible ou ne dit mot,
    On le méprise, on le raille, on le pille,
  Quelquefois cependant c'est ce petit marmot
  Qui fera le bonheur de toute la famille._


  FIN.




  _Extrait du Privilége du Roy._


Par Grace & Privilége du Roy, Donné à Fontainebleau, le 28. Octobre
1696. Signé LOUVET, & Scelé: Il est permis au Sieur P. DARMANCOUR, de
faire Imprimer par tel Imprimeur ou Libraire qu'il voudra choisir, un
Livre qui a pour titre, _Histoires ou Contes du temps passé, avec des
Moralités_; & ce pendant le temps & espace de six années consecutives,
avec défense à tous Imprimeurs & Libraires de Nôtre Royaume, ou autres:
d'Imprimer ou faire imprimer, vendre & distribüer ledit Livre sans son
consentement, ou de ceux qui auront droit de lui; pendant ledit temps,
sur les peines portées plus au long par ledit Privilége: Et ledit Sieur
P. Darmancour a cedé son Privilége à Claude Barbin, pour en joüir par
luy, suivant l'accord fait entr'eux.

_Registré sur le Livre de la Communauté des Imprimeurs & Libraires de
Paris le 11. Janvier 1697._

          Signé, P. AUBOUIN,
               Syndic.

Les Exemplaires ont esté fournis.




  CONTES

  _EN VERS_


  PAR MR. PERRAULT,

  DE L'ACADEMIE FRANÇOISE.




  TABLE.


  _Préface_                          p. 77

  _Peau d'Asne, Conte_               p. 83

  _Les Souhaits Ridicules, Conte_   p. 107

  _Griselidis, Nouvelle_            p. 113




  PRÉFACE.[100]


La manière dont le public a reçu les pièces de ce recueil, à mesure
qu'elles lui ont été données séparément, est une espèce d'assurance
qu'elles ne lui déplairont pas, en paroissant toutes ensemble. Il est
vrai que quelques personnes, qui affectent de paroître graves, et qui
ont assez d'esprit pour voir que ce sont des contes faits à plaisir, et
que la matière n'en est pas fort importante, les ont regardées avec
mépris; mais on a eu la satisfaction de voir que les gens de bon goût
n'en ont pas jugé de la sorte.

Ils ont éte bien aises de remarquer que ces bagatelles n'étoient pas de
pures bagatelles, qu'elles renfermoient une morale utile, et que le
récit enjoué dont elles étoient enveloppées n'avoit été choisi que pour
les faire entrer plus agréablement dans l'esprit et d'une manière qui
instruisît et divertît tout ensemble. Cela devoit me suffire pour ne pas
craindre le reproche de m'être amusé à des choses frivoles. Mais, comme
j'ai affaire à bien des gens qui ne se payent pas de raisons, et qui ne
peuvent être touchés que par l'autorité et par l'exemple des anciens, je
vais les satisfaire là-dessus.

Les fables milésiennes, si célèbres parmi les Grecs, et qui ont fait les
délices d'Athènes et de Rome, n'étoient pas d'une autre espèce que les
fables de ce recueil. L'histoire de la Matrone d'Ephèse est de la même
nature que celle de Griselidis: ce sont l'une et l'autre des Nouvelles,
c'est-à-dire des récits de choses qui peuvent être arrivées et qui n'ont
rien qui blesse absolument la vraisemblance. La fable de Psyché, écrite
par Lucien et par Apulée, est une fiction toute pure et un conte de
vieille, comme celui de Peau d'Ane. Aussi voyons-nous qu'Apulée le fait
raconter, par une vieille femme, à une jeune fille que des voleurs
avoient enlevée, de même que celui de Peau d'Ane est conté tous les
jours à des enfants par leurs gouvernantes et par leurs grand'mères. La
fable du laboureur qui obtint de Jupiter le pouvoir de faire, comme il
lui plairoit, la pluie et le beau temps, et qui en usa de telle sorte
qu'il ne recueillit que de la paille sans aucuns grains, parce qu'il
n'avoit jamais demandé ni vent, ni froid, ni neige, ni aucun temps
semblable, chose nécessaire cependant pour faire fructifier les plantes;
cette fable, dis-je, est de même genre que le conte des Souhaits
ridicules, si ce n'est que l'un est sérieux et l'autre comique; mais
tous les deux vont à dire que les hommes ne connoissent pas ce qui leur
convient, et sont plus heureuz d'être conduits par la Providence, que si
toutes choses leur succédoient selon qu'ils le désirent.

Je ne crois pas qu'ayant devant moi de si beaux modèles, dans la plus
sage et la plus docte antiquité, on soit en droit de me faire aucun
reproche. Je prétends même que mes fables méritent mieux d'être
racontées que la plupart des contes anciens, et particulièrement celui
de la Matrone d'Ephèse et celui de Psyché, si on les regarde du côté de
la morale, chose principale dans toutes sortes de fables, et pour
laquelle elles doivent avoir été faites. Toute la moralité qu'on peut
tirer de la Matrone d'Ephèse est que souvent les femmes qui semblent les
plus vertueuses le sont le moins, et qu'ainsi il n'y en a presque point
qui le soient véritablement.

Qui ne voit que cette morale est très-mauvaise, et qu'elle ne va qu'à
corrompre les femmes par le mauvais exemple, et à leur faire croire
qu'en manquant à leur devoir elles ne font que suivre la voie commune?
Il n'en est pas de même de la morale de Griselidis, qui tend à porter
les femmes à souffrir de leurs maris, et à faire voir qu'il n'y en a
point de si brutal ni de si bizarre dont la patience d'une honnête femme
ne puisse venir à bout.

A l'égard de la morale cachée dans la fable de Psyché, fable en
elle-même très-agréable et très-ingénieuse, je la comparerai avec celle
de Peau d'Ane, quand je la saurai; mais, jusqu'ici, je n'ai pu la
deviner. Je sais bien que Psyché signifie l'âme; mais je ne comprends
point ce qu'il faut entendre par l'Amour, qui est amoureux de Psyché,
c'est-à-dire de l'âme, et encore moins ce qu'on ajoute, que Psyché
devoit être heureuse tant qu'elle ne connoîtroit point celui dont elle
étoit aimée, qui étoit l'Amour; mais qu'elle seroit très-malheureuse dès
le moment qu'elle viendroit à le connoître: voilà pour moi une énigme
impénétrable. Tout ce qu'on peut dire, c'est que cette fable, de même
que la plupart de celles qui nous restent des anciens, n'ont été faites
que pour plaire, sans égard aux bonnes moeurs, qu'ils négligeoient
beaucoup.

Il n'en est pas de même des Contes que nos aïeux ont inventés pour leurs
enfants. Ils ne les ont pas contés avec l'élégance et les agréments dont
les Grecs et les Romains ont orné leurs fables; mais ils ont toujours eu
un très-grand soin que leurs contes renfermassent une morale louable et
instructive. Partout la vertu y est récompensée, et partout le vice y
est puni. Ils tendent tous à faire voir l'avantage qu'il y a d'être
honnête, patient, avisé, laborieux, obéissant, et le mal qui arrive à
ceux qui ne le sont pas.

Tantôt ce sont des fées qui donnent pour don à une jeune fille qui leur
aura repondu avec civilité, qu'à chaque parole qu'elle dira, il lui
sortira de la bouche un diamant ou une perle; et, à une autre fille qui
leur aura répondu brutalement, qu'à chaque parole il lui sortira de la
bouche une grenouille ou un crapaud. Tantôt ce sont des enfants qui,
pour avoir bien obéi à leur père et à leur mère, deviennent grands
seigneurs; ou d'autres qui, ayant été vicieux et désobéissans, sont
tombés dans des malheurs épouvantables.

Quelque frivoles et bizarres que soient toutes ces fables dans leurs
aventures, il est certain qu'elles excitent dans les enfants le désir de
ressembler à ceux qu'ils voient devenir heureux, et en même temps la
crainte des malheurs où les méchans sont tombés par leur méchanceté.
N'est-il pas louable à des pères et à des mères, lorsque leurs enfants
ne sont pas encore capables de goûter les vérités solides et dénuées de
tout agrément, de les leur faire aimer, et, si cela se peut dire, de les
leur faire avaler, en les enveloppant dans des récits agréables et
proportionnés à la foiblesse de leur âge! Il n'est pas croyable avec
quelle avidité ces âmes innocentes, et dont rien n'a encore corrompu la
droiture naturelle, reçoivent ces instructions cachées; on les voit dans
la tristesse et dans l'abattement tant que le héros ou l'héroïne du
conte sont dans le malheur, et s'écrier de joie quand le temps de leur
bonheur arrive; de même qu'après avoir souffert impatiemment la
prospérité du méchant ou de la méchante, ils sont ravis de les voir
enfin punis comme ils le méritent. Ce sont des semences qu'on jette, qui
ne produisent d'abord que des mouvements de joie et de tristesse, mais
dont il ne manque guère d'éclore de bonnes inclinations.

J'aurois pu rendre mes contes plus agréables, en y mêlant certaines
choses un peu libres dont on a accoutumé de les égayer; mais le désir de
plaire ne m'a jamais assez tenté pour violer une loi que je me suis
imposée, de ne rien écrire qui pût blesser ou la pudeur, ou la
bienséance. Voici un madrigal qu'une jeune demoiselle de beaucoup
d'esprit a composé sur ce sujet, et qu'elle a écrit au-dessous du conte
de Peau d'Ane que je lui avois envoyé:

  Le conte de Peau d'Ane est ici raconté
      Avec tant de naïveté,
      Qu'il ne m'a pas moins divertie
  Que quand, auprès du feu, ma nourrice ou ma mie
  Tenoient en le faisant mon esprit enchanté.
  On y voit par endroits quelques traits de satire,
    Mais qui, sans fiel et sans malignité,
  A tous également font du plaisir à lire.
  Ce qui me plaît encor dans sa simple douceur
      C'est qu'il divertit et fait rire,
      Sans que mère, époux, confesseur,
      Y puissent trouver à redire.

[Footnote 100: From the Griselidis of 1695.]




  PEAU D'ASNE.

  _CONTE._

  A MADAME LA MARQUISE DE L.

  PAR MR. PERRAULT, DE L'ACADEMIE FRANÇOISE.


  Il est des gens de qui l'esprit guindé,
      Sous un front jamais deridé
      Ne souffre, n'approuve & n'estime
      Que le pompeux & le sublime;
      Pour moi, j'ose poser en fait
  Qu'en de certains momens l'esprit le plus parfait
  Peut aimer sans rougir jusqu'aux Marionnettes;
      Et qu'il est des tems & des lieux
      Où le grave & le serieux
      Ne vallent pas d'agreables sornettes.
      Pourquoi faut-il s'émerveiller
      Que la Raison la mieux sensée,
      Lasse souvent de trop veiller,
      Par des contes d'Ogre[101] & de Fée
      Ingenieusement bercée,
      Prenne plaisir à sommeiller,
      Sans craindre donc qu'on me condamne
      De mal employer mon loisir,
  Je vais, pour contenter vôtre juste desir,
  Vous conter tout au long l'histoire de Peau D'Asne.

[Footnote 101: Homme Sauvage qui mangeoit les petits enfans.]

       *     *     *     *     *

        Il étoit une fois un Roi
          Le plus grand qui fût sur la Terre,
        Aimable en Paix, terrible en Guerre,
        Seul enfin comparable à soi:
  Ses voisins le craignoient, ses Etats étoient calmes,
        Et l'on voyoit de toutes parts
        Fleurir, à l'ombre de ses palmes
        Et les Vertus & les beaux Arts.
  Son aimable Moitié, sa Compagne fidelle,
        Etoit si charmante & si belle,
  Avoit l'esprit si commode & si doux
        Qu'il étoit encor avec elle
        Moins heureux Roi qu'heureux espoux.
        De leur tendre & chaste Hymenée,
        Plein de douceur & d'agrement
  Avec tant de vertus une fille étoit née,
        Qu'ils se consoloient aisement
    De n'avoir pas de plus ample lignée.

        Dans son vaste & riche Palais,
        Ce n'étoit que magnificence,
  Partout y fourmilloit une vive abondance
        De Courtisans & de Valets;
        Il avoit dans son Escurie
  Grands & petits chevaux de toutes les façons,
        Couverts de beaux caparaçons
        Roides d'or & de broderie;
  Mais ce qui surprenoit tout le monde en entrant
        C'est qu'au lieu plus apparent,
  Un maître Asne étailloit ses deux grandes oreilles,
        Cette injustice vous surprend,
  Mais, lorsque vous sçaurez ses vertus nompareilles,
  Vous ne trouverez pas que l'honneur fût trop grand.
    Tel et si net le forma la Nature
        Qu'il ne faisoit jamais d'ordure,
        Mais bien beaux Ecus au soleil
        Et Loüis de toute maniere
  Qu'on alloit recuëillir sur la blonde litiere
        Tous les matins à son reveil.

        Or le Ciel qui par fois se lasse
        De rendre les hommes contents,
  Qui toûjours à ses biens mêle quelque disgrace
        Ainsi que la pluye au beau tems,
        Permit qu'une aspre maladie
  Tout à coup de la Reine attaquât les beaux jours.
        Par tout on cherche du secours,
  Mais ni la Faculté qui le Grec étudie,
        Ni les Charlatans ayant cours,
  Ne pûrent tous ensemble arrêter l'incendie
  Que la fievre allumoit en s'augmentant toûjours.

        Arrivée a sa derniere heure,
        Elle dit au Roi son époux
        Trouvez bon qu'avant que je meure,
        J'exige une chose de vous
        C'est que s'il vous prenoit envie
  De vous remarier quand je n'y serai plus...
      --Ha! dit le Roi, ces soins sont superflus,
        Je n'y songerai de ma vie,
        Soyez en repos là dessus.
        Je le croi bien, reprit la Reine,
  Si j'en prens à témoin vôtre amour vehement,
        Mais pour m'en rendre plus certaine
        Je veux avoir vôtre serment,
  Adouci toute fois par ce temperamment
  Que si vous rencontrez une femme plus belle,
        Mieux faite & plus sage que moi,
  Vous pourrez franchement lui donner vôtre foi
        Et vous marier avec elle:
        Sa confiance en ses attraits
  Lui faisoit regarder une telle promesse
      Comme un serment surpris avec adresse
        De ne se marier jamais.
  Le Prince jura donc, les yeux baignez de larmes
        Tout ce que la Reine voulut;
        La Reine entre ses bras mourut,
  Et jamais un Mari ne fit tant de vacarmes.
  A l'ouïr sanglotter & les nuits & les jours,
  On jugea que son deüil ne lui durerait guerre
      Et qu'il pleuroit ses defuntes Amours
  Comme un homme pressé qui veut sortir d'affaire.
  On ne se trompa point. Au bout de quelques mois
  Il voulut proceder à faire un nouveau choix;
        Mais ce n'étoit pas chose aisée,
        Il falloit garder son serment
        Et que la nouvelle Epousée
        Eût plus d'attraits & d'agrement
  Que celle qu'on venoit de mettre au monument.

        Ni la Cour en beautez fertile,
        Ni la Campagne, ni la Ville,
        Ni les Royaumes d'alentour
        Dont on alla faire le tour,
        N'en pûrent fournir une telle,
        L'Infante seule étoit plus belle
    Et possedoit certains tendres appas
        Que la deffunte n'avoit pas.
        Le Roy le remarqua lui-même
        Et brûlant d'un amour extreme
        Alla follement s'aviser
  Que par cette raison il devoit l'épouser.
        Il trouva même un Casuiste
  Qui jugea que le cas se pouvoit proposer;
        Mais la jeune Princesse triste
        D'oüïr parler d'un tel amour,
    Se lamentoit & pleuroit nuit & jour.

        De mille chagrins l'ame pleine
        Elle alla trouver sa Maraine,
        Loin dans une grotte à l'écart
  De Nacre & de Corail richement étoffée;
        C'étoit une admirable Fée
    Qui n'eut jamais de pareille en son Art.
        Il n'est pas besoin qu'on vous die
  Ce qu'étoit une Fée en ces bienheureux tems,
        Car je suis sûr que votre Mie
    Vous l'aura dit dez vos plus jeunes ans.

        Je sçay, dit-elle, en voyant la Princesse
          Ce qui vous fait venir ici,
  Je sais de votre coeur la profonde tristesse
    Mais avec moi n'ayez plus de souci.
        Il n'est rien qui vous puisse nuire
  Pourvû qu'à mes conseils vous vous laissiez conduire,
  Votre Pere, il est vrai, voudroit vous épouser;
        Ecouter sa folle demande
        Seroit une faute bien grande
  Mais sans le contredire on le peut refuser.

        Dites-lui qu'il faut qu'il vous donne
        Pour rendre vos desirs contents,
  Avant qu'à son amour vôtre coeur s'abandonne
  Une Robe qui soit de la couleur du Tems.
  Malgré tout son pouvoir et toute sa richesse,
  Quoi que le Ciel en tout favorise ses voeux,
  Il ne pourra jamais accomplir sa promesse.

        Aussi-tôt la jeune Princesse
  L'alla dire en tremblant à son Pere amoureux
        Qui dans le moment fit entendre
        Aux Tailleurs les plus importans
  Que s'ils ne lui faisoient, sans trop le faire attendre,
  Une robe qui fût de la couleur du Temps,
  Ils pouvoient s'assurer qu'il les feroit
                            Tous pendre.

    Le second jour ne luisoit pas encor
    Qu'on apporta la robe desirée;
        Le plus beau bleu de l'Empirée
  N'est pas, lorsqu'il est ceint de gros nuages d'or
        D'une couleur plus azurée.
  De joye & de douleur l'Infante penetrée
        Ne sçait que dire ni comment
    Se derober à son engagement.
        Princesse demandez-en une,
        Lui dit sa Maraine tout bas,
        Qui plus brillante & moins commune,
        Soit de la couleur de la Lune
        Il ne vous la donnera pas.
  A peine la Princesse en eut fait la demande
        Que le Roi dit à son Brodeur,
  Que l'astre de la Nuit n'ait pas plus de splendeur
  Et que dans quatre jours sans faute on me la rende.

  Le riche habillement fut fait au jour marqué
    Tel que le Roy s'en étoit expliqué
  Dans les Cieux où la Nuit a deployé ses voiles,
  La Lune est moins pompeuse en sa robe d'argent
  Lors même qu'au milieu de son cours diligent
  Sa plus vive clarté fait pâlir les étoiles.

  La Princesse admirant ce merveilleux habit
  Estoit à consentir presque deliberée,
        Mais, par sa Maraine inspirée
        Au Prince amoureux elle dit,
        Je ne sçaurois être contente
  Que je n'aye une Robe encore plus brillante
        Et de la couleur du Soleil;
  Le Prince qui l'aimoit d'un amour sans pareil
  Fit venir aussi-tôt un riche Lapidaire
        Et lui commanda de la faire
  D'un superbe tissu d'or & de diamans,
  Disant que s'il manquoit à le bien satisfaire,
  Il le feroit mourir au milieu des tourmens.
  Le Prince fut exempt de s'en donner la peine,
        Car l'ouvrier industrieux,
        Avant la fin de la semaine
    Fit apporter l'ouvrage precieux
        Si beau, si vif, si radieux
        Que le blond Amant de Climene
        Lorsque sur la voute des Cieux
        Dans son char d'or il se promene
  D'un plus brillant éclat n'ébloüit pas les yeux.

  L'Infante que ces dons achevent de confondre
  A son Pere, à son Roi ne sçait plus que répondre;
  Sa Maraine aussi-tôt la prenant par la main,
      Il ne faut pas, lui dit-elle à l'oreille,
        Demeurer en si beau chemin,
        Est-ce une si grande merveille
    Que tous ces dons que vous en recevez
    Tant qu'il aura l'Asne que vous sçavez
    Qui d'écus d'or sans cesse emplit sa bource;
  Demandez-lui la peau de ce rare Animal,
        Comme il est toute sa resource,
  Vous ne l'obtiendrez pas, ou je raisonne mal.

        Cette Fée étoit bien sçavante,
    Et cependant elle ignoroit encor
  Que l'amour violent pourvû qu'on le contente,
        Conte pour rien l'argent & l'or;
  La peau fut galamment aussi tôt accordée
        Que l'Infante l'eut demandée.

        Cette Peau quand on l'apporta
        Terriblement l'epouvanta
  Et la fit de son sort amerement se plaindre,
  Sa Maraine survint & lui representa
  Que quand on fait le bien on ne doit jamais craindre;
        Qu'il faut laisser penser au Roy
        Qu'elle est tout à fait disposée
  A subir avec lui la conjugale Loi;
  Mais qu'au même moment seule & bien deguisée
  Il faut qu'elle s'en aille en quelque Etat lointain
  Pour éviter un mal si proche & si certain.

  Voici, poursuivit-elle, une grande cassette
        Où nous mettrons tous vos habits
        Vôtre miroir, vôtre toillette,
        Vos diamans & vos rubis.
        Je vous donne encor ma Baguette;
        En la tenant en vôtre main
  La cassette suivra vôtre même chemin.
        Toujours sous la Terre cachée;
        Et lorsque vous voudrez l'ouvrir
  A peine mon bâton la Terre aura touchée
  Qu'aussi-tôt à vos yeux elle viendra s'offrir.

        Pour vous rendre méconnaissable
  La dépoüille de l'Asne est un masque admirable
        Cachez-vous bien dans cette peau,
  On ne croira jamais, tant elle est effroyable
        Qu'elle renferme rien de beau.

        La Princesse ainsi travestie
  De chez la sage Fée à peine fut sortie,
        Pendant la fraîcheür du matin
        Que le Prince qui pour la Fête
        De son heureux Hymen s'apprête
  Apprend tout effrayé son funeste destin.
  Il n'est point de maison, de chemin, d'avenuë
        Qu'on ne parcoure promptement,
  On ne peut deviner ce qu'elle est devenuë.

  Par tout se répandit un triste & noir chagrin
        Plus de Nopces, plus de Festin,
        Plus de Tarte, plus de Dragées,
  Les Dames de la Cour toutes découragées
        N'en dînerent point la plûpart;
  Mais du Curé sur tout la tristesse fut grande,
        Car il en dejeuna fort tard
        Et qui pis est n'eut point d'offrande.

  L'Infante cependant poursuivoit son chemin
  Le visage couvert d'une vilaine crasse
    A tous Passans elle tendoit la main
  Et tâchoit pour servir de trouver une place;
  Mais les moins delicats & les plus malheureux
  La voyant si maussade & si pleine d'ordure
  Ne vouloient écouter ni retirer chez eux
        Une si sale creature.
  Elle alla donc bien loin, bien loin, encor plus loin,
  Enfin elle arriva dans une Metairie
        Où la Fermiere avoit besoin
        D'une soüillon, dont l'industrie
  Allât jusqu'à sçavoir bien laver des torchons
        Et nettoyer l'auge aux Cochons.

  On la mit dans un coin au fond de la cuisine
    Où les Valets, insolente vermine,
        Ne faisoient que la tirailler,
        La contredire & la railler,
    Ils ne sçavoient quelle piece lui faire
        La harcelant à tout propos;
        Elle étoit la butte ordinaire
  De tous leurs quolibets & de tous leurs bons mots.

  Elle avoit le Dimanche un peu plus de repos,
  Car ayant du matin fait sa petite affaire,
  Elle entroit dans sa chambre & tenant son huis clos,
  Elle se decrassoit, puis ouvroit sa cassette,
        Mettoit proprement sa toilette
        Rangeoit dessus ses petits pots,
  Devant son grand miroir contente & satisfaite;
  De la Lune tantôt, la robe elle mettoit
  Tantôt celle où le feu du Soleil éclattoit,
        Tantôt la belle robe blüe
  Que tout l'azur des Cieux ne sçauroit égaler,
  Avec ce chagrin seul que leur traînante queüe
  Sur le plancher trop court ne pouvoit s'étaler.
  Elle aimoit à se voir jeune, vermeille & blanche
  Et plus brave cent fois que nulle autre n'êtoit;
        Ce doux plaisir la sustentoit
    Et la menoit jusqu'à l'autre Dimanche.

        J'oubliois à dire en passant
        Qu'en cette grande Metairie
        D'un Roy magnifique & puissant
        Se faisoit la Menagerie,
        Que là, Poules de Barbarie,
        Rales, Pintades, Cormorans,
        Oisons musquez, Cannes Petieres
  Et mille autres oiseaux de bijares manieres,
        Entre eux presque tous differents
  Remplissoient à l'envi dix cours toutes entieres.

    Le fils du Roy dans ce charmant sejour
    Venoit souvent au retour de la Chasse
        Se reposer, boire à la glace
        Avec les Seigneurs de sa Cour.
        Tel ne fut point le beau Cephale;
  Son air étoit Royal, sa mine martiale
  Propre à faire trembler les plus fiers bataillons;
  Peau d'Asne de fort loin le vit avec tendresse
    Et reconnut par cette hardiesse
        Que sous sa crasse & ses haillons
  Elle gardoit encor le coeur d'une Princesse.

        Qu'il a l'air grand, quoi qu'il l'ait negligé,
        Qu'il est aimable, disoit-elle,
        Et que bienheureuse est la belle
        A qui son coeur est engagé.
  D'une robe de rien s'il m'avoit honorée.
        Je m'en trouverois plus parée
        Que de toutes celles que j'ai.

  Un jour le jeune Prince errant à l'aventure
        De bassecour en bassecour,
        Passa dans une allée obscure
    Où de Peau d'Asne étoit l'humble sejour.
  Par hasard il mit l'oeil au trou de la serrure;
        Comme il étoit fête ce jour
    Elle avoit pris une riche parure
        Et ses superbes vêtemens
  Qui tissus de fin or & de gros diamans
  Egaloient du Soleil la clarté la plus pure.
        Le Prince au gré de son désir
        La contemple & ne peut qu'à peine,
        En la voyant, reprendre haleine,
        Tant il est comblé de plaisir.
  Quels que soient les habits, la beauté du visage,
        Son beau tour, sa vive blancheur,
        Ses traits fins, sa jeune fraîcheur
        Le touchent cent fois davantage,
        Mais un certain air de grandeur
  Plus encore une sage & modeste pudeur
  Des beautez de son ame, asseuré témoignage,
        S'emparerent de tout son coeur.

  Trois fois dans la chaleur du feu qui le transporte
        Il voulut enfoncer la porte,
    Mais croyant voir une Divinité,
  Trois fois par le respect son bras fut arrêté,
  Dans le Palais pensif il se retire
        Et là nuit & jour il soupire,
        Il ne veut plus aller au Bal
        Quoi qu'on soit dans le Carnaval,
    Il hait la Chasse, il hait la Comedie
  Il n'a plus d'appetit, tout lui fait mal au coeur
        Et le fond de sa maladie
    Est une triste & mortelle langueur.

  Il s'enquit quelle étoit cette Nymphe admirable
    Qui demeuroit dans une bassecour
        Au fond d'une allée effroyable,
        Où l'on ne voit goutte en plein jour.
  C'est, lui dit-on, Peau d'Asne, en rien Nymphe ni bele
        Et que Peau d'Asne l'on appelle,
  A cause de la peau qu'elle met sur son cou;
        De l'Amour c'est le vrai remede,
        La bête en un mot la plus laide,
        Qu'on puisse voir aprés le Loup:
    On a beau dire, il ne sçauroit le croire,
        Les traits que l'amour a tracez
        Toujours presens à sa memoire
        N'en seront jamais effacez.

        Cependant la Reyne sa Mere,
  Qui n'a que lui d'enfant pleure & se desespere,
  De declarer son mal elle le presse en vain,
        Il gemit, il pleure, il soupire,
    Il ne dit rien, si ce n'est qu'il desire
  Que Peau d'Asne lui fasse un gâteau de sa main;
  Et la Mere ne sçait ce que son Fils veut dire;
        O Ciel! Madame, lui dit-on,
    Cette Peau d'Asne est une noire Taupe
        Plus vilaine encore & plus gaupe
        Que le plus sale Marmiton.
  N'importe, dit la Reyne, il le faut satisfaire,
  Et c'est à cela seul que nous devons songer;
  Il auroit eu de l'or, tant l'aimoit cette Mere,
        S'il en avoit voulu manger.

        Peau d'Asne donc prend sa farine
        Qu'elle avoit fait blutter exprés,
        Pour rendre sa pâte plus fine,
        Son sel, son beurre & ses oeufs frais,
        Et pour bien faire sa galette
        S'enferme seule en sa chambrette.

        D'abord elle se decrassa
        Les mains, les bras & le visage,
  Et prit un corps d'argent que vîte elle laça
        Pour dignement faire l'ouvrage,
        Qu'aussi-tôt elle commença.

  On dit qu'en travaillant un peu trop à la hâte,
  De son doigt par hazard il tomba dans la pâte
        Un de ses anneaux de grand prix,
  Mais ceux qu'on tient sçavoir le fin de cette histoire
  Asseurent que par elle exprés il y fut mis;
  Et pour moi franchement, je l'oserois bien croire,
  Fort seur que quand le Prince à sa porte aborda
        Et par le trou la regarda,
          Elle s'en étoit apperçûë.
        Sur ce point la Femme est si druë,
        Et son oeil va si promptement
        Qu'on ne peut la voir un moment,
        Qu'elle ne sçache qu'on l'a veüe.
  Je suis bien seur encore, et j'en ferois serment
  Qu'elle ne douta point que de son jeune Amant
        La Bague ne fût bien receuë.

  On ne pêtrit jamais un si friand morceau,
  Et le Prince trouva la galette si bonne
  Qu'il ne s'en fallut rien que d'une faim gloutonne
        Il n'avalât aussi l'anneau.
    Quand il en vit l'émeraude admirable,
        Et du jonc d'or le cercle étroit,
        Qui marquoit la forme du doigt,
  Son coeur en fut touché d'une joye incroyable;
    Sous son chevet il le mit à l'instant
        Et son mal toujours augmentant
    Les Medecins sages d'experience,
    En le voyant maigrir de jour en jour
    Jugerent tous par leur grande science
        Qu'il étoit malade d'amour.

    Comme l'Hymen, quelque mal qu'on en die,
  Est un remede exquis pour cette maladie,
        On conclut à le marier;
        Il s'en fit quelque tems prier,
  Puis dit, je le veux bien, pourvû que l'on me donne
        En mariage la personne
        Pour qui cet anneau sera bon;
        A cette bijare demande
  De la Reine & du Roi la surprise fut grande,
  Mais il étoit si mal qu'on n'osa dire non.
        Voilà donc qu'on se met en quête
  De celle que l'anneau, sans nul égard du sang,
        Doit placer dans un si haut rang,
        Il n'en est point qui ne s'apprête
        A venir presenter son doigt
        Ni qui veüille ceder son droit.

  Le bruit ayant couru que pour prétendre au Prince,
        Il faut avoir le doigt bien mince,
    Tout Charlatan, pour être bien venu,
  Dit qu'il a le secret de le rendre menu,
    L'une en suivant son bizare caprice
        Bomme une rave le ratisse,
        L'autre en couppe un petit morceau,
  Une autre en le pressant croit qu'elle l'appetisse,
        Et l'autre avec de certaine eau
  Pour le rendre moins gros en fait tomber la peau;
        Il n'est enfin point de manoeuvre
        Qu'une Dame ne mette en oeuvre,
  Pour faire que son doigt quadre bien à l'anneau.

  L'essai fut commencé par les jeunes Princesses
        Les Marquises & les Duchesses,
        Mais leurs doigts quoi que delicats
        Estoient trop gros & n'entroient pas.
        Les Comtesses & les Baronnes,
        Et toutes les nobles Personnes,
  Comme elles tour à tour presenterent leur main
        Et la presenterent en vain.

        Ensuite vinrent les Grisettes,
        Dont les jolis & menus doigts,
        Car il en est de tres-bien faites,
  Semblerent à l'anneau s'ajuster quelquefois
  Mais la Bague toujours trop petite ou trop ronde
  D'un dedain presque égal rebuttoit tout le monde.

        Il fallut en venir enfin
        Aux Servantes, aux Cuisinieres,
        Aux Tortillons, aux Dindonnieres;
        En un mot à tout le fretin,
        Dont les rouges & noires pattes,
        Non moins que les mains delicates
        Esperoient un heureux destin.
        Il s'y presenta mainte fille
        Dont le doigt gros & ramassé,
  Dans la Bague du Prince eût aussi peu passé
        Qu'un cable au travers d'une aiguille.
        On crut enfin que c'étoit fait,
        Car il ne restoit en effet,
  Que la pauvre Peau d'Asne au fond de la cuisine,
        Mais comment croire, disoit-on,
        Qu'à regner le Ciel la destine,
        Le Prince dit, & pourquoi non?
  Qu'on la fasse venir. Chacun se prît à rire
  Criant tout haut que veut-on dire,
  De faire entrer ici cette sale guenon
  Mais lorsqu'elle tira de dessous sa peau noire
  Une petite main qui sembloit de l'yvoire,
        Qu'un peu de pourpre a coloré,
        Et que de la bague fatale,
        D'une justesse sans égale
        Son petit doigt fut entouré,
        La Cour fut dans une surprise
        Qui ne peut pas être comprise.

  On la menoit au Roi dans ce transport subit,
  Mais elle demanda qu'avant que de paraître
        Devant son Seigneur & son Maître
  On lui donnât le temps de prendre un autre habit,
    De cet habit, pour la verité dire,
    De tous côtez on s'apprétoit à rire,
  Mais lorsqu'elle arriva dans les Appartemens
        Et qu'elle eut traversé les salles
        Avec ses pompeux vêtemens
  Dont les riches beautez n'eurent jamais d'égales,
        Que ses aimables cheveux blonds
  Mêlez de diamans dont la vive lumiere
        En faisoit autant de rayons,
        Que ses yeux bleus, grands, doux & longs,
        Qui pleins d'une Majesté fiere
  Ne regardent jamais sans plaire & sans blesser,
  Et que sa taille enfin si menüe & si fine
  Qu'avecque ses deux mains on eût pu l'embrasser,
  Montrerent leurs appas & leur grace divine;
  Des Dames de la Cour, & de leurs ornemens
        Tomberent tous les agrémens.

  Dans la joye & le bruit de toute l'Assemblée,
        Le bon Roi ne se sentoit pas
    De voir sa Bru posseder tant d'appas,
        La Reyne en étoit affolée,
        Et le Prince son cher Amant,
        De cent plaisirs l'âme comblée
  Succomboit sous le poids de son ravissement.
  Pour l'Hymen aussitôt chacun prit ses mesures,
  Le Monarque en pria tous les Rois d'alentour,
    Qui tous brillans de diverses parures
  Quitterent leurs Etats pour être à ce-grand jour
  On en vit arriver des climats de l'Aurore,
        Montez sur de grands Elephans,
        Il en vint du rivage More,
        Qui plus noirs & plus laids encore,
        Faisoient peur aux petits enfans;
    Il en debarque & la Cour en abonde.

        Mais nul Prince, nul Potentat,
        N'y parut avec tant d'éclat
        Que le Pere de l'Epousée,
        Qui d'elle autrefois amoureux
  Avoit avec le temps purifié les feux
        Dont son ame étoit embrasée,
  Il en avoit banni tout desir criminel
        Et de cette odieuse flamme
        Le peu qui restoit dans son ame
  N'en rendoit que plus vif son amour paternel.
    Dés qu'il la vit, que benit soit le Ciel
        Qui veut bien que je te revoye,
  Ma chere enfant, dit-il, &, tout pleurant de joye
        Courut tendrement l'embrasser;
  Chacun à son bonheur voulut s'interesser,
  Et le futur Espoux étoit ravi d'apprendre
  Que d'un Roi si puissant il devenoit le Gendre.
    Dans ce moment la Maraine arriva
        Qui raconta toute l'histoire,
        Et par son recit acheva
        De combler Peau d'Asne de gloire.

        Il n'est pas malaisé de voir
  Que le but de ce conte est qu'un Enfant apprenne
  Qu'il vaut mieux s'exposer à la plus rude peine
        Que de manquer à son devoir.

    Que la Vertu peut être infortunée
        Mais qu'elle est toujours couronnée.

  Que contre un fol amour & ses fougueux transports
  La Raison la plus forte est une foible digue,
    Et qu'il n'est point de si riches thresors
        Dont un Amant ne soit prodigue.

        Que de l'eau claire & du pain bis
        Suffisent pour la nourriture
        De toute jeune Creature,
        Pourvu qu'elle ait de beaux habits.

    Que sous le Ciel il n'est point de femelle
        Qui ne s'imagine être belle,
    Et qui souvent ne s'imagine encor
  Que si des trois Beautez la fameuse querelle,
        S'étoit demêlée avec elle
        Elle auroit eu la pomme d'or.
  Le Conte de Peau d'Asne est difficile à croire,
  Mais tant que dans le Monde on aura des Enfans,
        Des Meres & des Meres-grands,
        On en gardera la memoire.




  LES SOUHAITS RIDICULES.

  _CONTE._

  A MADEMOISELLE DE LA C.

  PAR MR. PERRAULT, DE L'ACADEMIE FRANÇOISE.


  Si vous étiez moins raisonnable,
    Je me garderois bien de venir vous conter
        La folle & peu galante Fable,
        Que je m'en vais vous debiter.
  Une aune de Boudin en fournit la matiere.
        Une aune de Boudin, ma chere:
        Quelle pitié! c'est une horreur,
        S'écrieroit une Pretieuse,
        Qui toujours tendre & serieuse,
  Ne veut ouir parler que d'affaires de coeur.

        Mais vous, qui mieux qu'autre qui vive,
        Sçavez charmer en racontant,
 Et dont l'expression est toujours si naïve,
        Que l'on croit voir ce qu'on entend,
        Qui sçavez que c'est la maniere
        Dont quelque chose est inventé,
        Qui beaucoup plus que la matiere,
        De tout recit fait la beauté,
  Vous aimerez ma Fable & sa moralité;
  J'en ai, j'ose le dire, une assurance entiere.

  Il étoit une fois un pauvre Bucheron,
        Qui las de sa penible vie,
        Avoit, disoit-il, grande envie
  De s'aller reposer aux bords de l'Acheron,
    Representant dans sa douleur profonde,
        Que depuis qu'il étoit au monde,
        Le Ciel cruel n'avoit jamais
  Voulu remplir un seul de ses souhaits.

  Un jour que dans le bois il se mit à se plaindre,
  A lui la foudre en main Jupitre s'apparut.
        On auroit peine à bien dépeindre
        La peur que le bonhomme en eut.
  Je ne veux rien, dit-il, en se jettant par terre,
        Point de souhaits, point de Tonnerre,
        Seigneur, demeurons but à but.
        Cesse d'avoir aucune crainte,
  Je viens, dit Jupiter, touché de ta complainte,
    Te faire voir le tort que tu me fais.
        Ecoute donc, je te promets,
  Moi qui du monde entier suis le Souverain Maître,
  D'exaucer pleinnement les trois premiers souhaits
  Que tu voudras former sur quoi que ce puisse être
        Voi ce qui peut te rendre heureux,
        Voi ce qui peut te satisfaire,
  Et comme ton bonheur dépend tout de tes voeux,
    Songes y bien avant que de les faire.

  A ces mots Jupiter dans les Cieux remonta,
  Et le gay Bucheron embrassant sa falourde,
  Pour retourner chez lui sur son dos la jetta.
  Cette charge jamais ne lui parut moins lourde,
        Il ne faut pas, disoit-il en trottant,
    Dans tout ceci rien faire à la legere
        Il faut, le cas est important,
  En prendre avis de nôtre Menagere,
  C'a, dit-il en entrant sous son toit de feugere,
        Faisons, Fanchon, grand feu, grand'chere,
        Nous sommes riches desormais,
    Et nous n'avons qu'à faire des souhaits.
  Là dessus fort au long tout se fait il lui conte.
    A ce recit, l'Epouse vive & prompte,
  Forma dans son esprit mille vastes projets,
        Mais considerant l'importance
        De s'y conduire avec prudence,
  Blaise, mon cher Ami, dit-elle à son Epoux,
    Ne gâtons rien par nôtre impatience,
        Examinons bien entre nous
    Ce qu'il faut faire en pareille occurrence.
  Remettons à demain notre premier souhait,
        Et consultons nôtre chevet.
  Je l'entens bien ainsi, dit le bonhomme Blaise,
  Mais va tirer du vin derriere ces fagots.
  A son retour il but, &, goütant à son aise
    Pres d'un grand feu la douceur du repos,
  Il dit, en s'appuyant sur le dos de sa chaise,
  Pendant que nous avons une si bonne braise,
  Une aune de Boudin viendroit bien à propos.
  A peine acheva-t-il de prononcer ces mots,
  Que sa Femme apperceut, grandement étonnée,
        Un Boudin fort long, qui partant
        D'un des coins de la cheminée,
        S'approchoit d'elle en serpentant.
        Elle fit un cri dans l'instant,
        Mais jugeant que cette avanture
        Avoit pour cause le souhait
        Que par bêtise toute pure
        Son homme imprudent avoit fait,
        Il n'est point de pouille, ni d'injure,
        Que de depit & de couroux
        Elle ne dît a son Epoux.

  Quand on peut, disoit-elle, obtenir un Empire,
        De l'or, des Perles, des Rubis,
        Des Diamans, de beaux Habits,
  Est-ce alors du Boudin qu'il faut que l'on desire?
  Eh bien, j'ai tort, dit-il, j'ai mal placé mon choix.
        J'ai commis une faute énorme,
        Je ferai mieux une autrefois.
  Bon, bon, dit-elle, attendez-moi sous l'orme.
  Pour faire un tel souhait, il faut être bien Boeuf.
  L'Epoux plus d'une fois emporté de colere
  Pensa faire tout bas le souhait d'être Veuf,
  Et peut-être entre nous ne pouvoit-il mieux faire.
  Les hommes, disoit-il, pour souffrir sont bien nez.
  Peste soit du Boudin, & du Boudin encore.
        Plût à Dieu, maudite Pecore,
        Qu'il te pendît au bout du nez!

  La Priere aussitôt du Ciel fut écoutée,
  Et dés que le Mari la parole lâcha
        Au nez de l'Epouse irritée
        L'Aune de Boudin s'attacha.
  Ce prodige impréveu grandement le fâcha.
  La Femme étoit jolie, elle avoit bonne grace,
  Et pour dire sans fard la verité du fait,
        Cet ornement en cette place
        Ne faisoit pas un bon effet,
  Si ce n'est qu'en pendant sur le bas du visage
  Et lui fermant la bouche à tout moment
    Il l'empéchoit de parler aisément,
    Pour un Epoux merveilleux avantage.
  Je pourrois bien, disoit-il à part soi
  Pour me dédommager d'un malheur si funeste,
        Avec le souhait qui me reste
        Tout d'un plein saut me faire Roi,
  Rien n'égale, il est vrai, la grandeur Souveraine,
        Mais encore faut-il songer
        Comment seroit faite la Reine,
   Et dans quelle douleur ce seroit la plonger,
        De l'aller placer sur un Trone
        Avec un nez plus long qu'une aune.
        Il faut l'écouter sur cela;
    Et qu'elle même elle soit la Maîtresse
    De devenir une grande Princesse,
    En conservant l'horrible nez qu'elle a,
        Ou de demeurer Bucheronne,
    Avec un nez comme une autre personne,
  Et tel qu'elle l'avoit avant ce malheur-là.

        La chose bien examinée,
  Quoi qu'elle sçeût d'un Sceptre & le prix & l'effet,
        Et que quand on est couronnée
        On a toujours le nez bien fait,
  Comme au desir de plaire il n'est rien qui ne cede,
    Elle aima mieux garder son Bavolet,
        Que d'être Reine & d'être laide.
  Ainsi le Bucheron ne changea point d'état;
        Il ne devint point Potentat,
        D'écus il n'emplit point sa Bourse,
  Trop heureux d'employer le souhait qui restoit,
        Fraîle bonheur, pauvre ressource,
  A remettre sa Femme en l'état qu'elle étoit;
    Tant il est vrai qu'aux hommes miserables,
  Aveugles, imprudens, inquiéts, variables,
    Pas n'appartient de faire des souhaits,
        Et que peu d'entre eux sont capables
  De bien user des dons que le Ciel leur a faits.




  GRISELIDIS.

  _NOUVELLE._

  PAR MR. PERRAULT, DE L'ACADEMIE FRANÇOISE.

  A MADEMOISELLE ----


  En vous offrant, jeune & sage Beauté
        Ce modele de patience,
        Je ne me suis jamais flatté
  Que par vous de tout point il seroit imité
        C'en seroit trop en conscience.

        Mais Paris où l'homme est poli,
        Où le beau sexe né pour plaire
        Trouve son bonheur accompli,
        De tous côtez est si rempli
        D'Exemples du vice contraire,
        Qu'on ne peut en toute saison
        Pour s'en garder ou s'en défaire,
        Avoir trop de contrepoison.

        Une Dame aussi patiente
  Que celle dont ici je reléve le prix,
    Seroit par tout une chose étonnante.
    Mais ce seroit un prodige à Paris.
        Les femmes y sont souveraines,
        Tout s'y regle selon leurs voeux,
        Enfin c'est un climat heureux
        Qui n'est habité que de Reines.

    Ainsi je voi que de toutes façons,
    Griselidis y sera peu prisée,
  Et qu'elle y donnera matiere de risée,
        Par ses trop antiques leçons.

        Ce n'est pas que la patience
  Ne soit une vertu des Dames de Paris,
  Mais, par un long usage elles ont la science
  De la faire exercer par leurs propres Maris.

       *     *     *     *     *

  Au pié des celebres Montagnes
        Où le Pô s'échappant de dessous ses roseaux,
    Va dans le sein des prochaines Campagnes,
        Promener ses naissantes eaux,
        Vivoit un jeune et vaillant Prince,
        Les delices de sa Province.
  Le Ciel en le formant, sur lui tout à la fois,
        Versa ce qu'il a de plus rare,
  Ce qu'entre ses Amis d'ordinaire il separe,
        Et qu'il ne donne qu'aux grands Rois.

  Comblé de tous les dons & du corps & de l'Ame,
  Il fut robuste, adroit, propre au métier de Mars,
  Et par l'instinct secret d'une divine flâme,
    Avec ardeur il aima les beaux arts.
  Il aima les combats, il aima la Victoire,
    Les grands projets, les actes Valeureux,
  Et tout ce qui fait vivre un beau nom dans l'Histoire;
        Mais son coeur tendre & genereux
  Fut encor plus sensible à la solide gloire
        De rendre ses peuples heureux.
        Ce temperament Héroïque
    Fut obscurci d'une sombre vapeur
        Qui chagrine & melancolique,
    Lui faisoit voir dans le fond de son Coeur,
    Tout le beau sexe infidelle & trompeur.
  Dans la femme, où brilloit le plus rare merite,
        Il voyoit une ame hipocrite,
        Un Esprit d'orgueïl enivré,
  Un cruel ennemi qui sans cesse n'aspire
        Qu'à prendre un souverain Empire
  Sur l'Homme malheureux qui lui sera livré.

        Le frequent usage du Monde,
  Où l'on ne voit qu'Epoux subjuguez ou trahis,
        Joint à l'air jaloux du Païs,
    Accrut encor cette haine profonde.
        Il jura donc plus d'une fois
  Que quand même le Ciel pour lui plein de tendresse,
        Formeroit une autre Lucrece,
  Jamais de l'himenée il ne suivroit les Loix.
  Ainsi, quand le matin, qu'il donnoit aux affaires,
        Il avoit reglé sagement
        Toutes les choses necessaires
        Au bonheur du Gouvernement,
  Que du foible orphelin, de la veuve oppressée,
        Il avoit conservé les droits,
  Ou banni quelque impôt qu'une guerre forcée
        Avoit introduit autrefois;
        L'autre moitié de la journée
        A la Chasse étoit destinée,
        Ou les Sangliers & les Ours,
        Malgré leur fureur & leurs Armes
        Lui donnoient encor moins d'allarmes
  Que le sexe charmant qu'il évitoit toujours.

  Cependant ses sujets que leur interét presse
        De s'asseurer d'un Successeur
  Qui les gouverne un jour avec même douceur,
  A leur donner un fils le convioient sans cesse.

  Un jour dans le Palais ils vinrent tous en corps
        Pour faire leurs derniers efforts;
    Un Orateur d'une grave apparence,
        Et le meilleur qui fût alors,
  Dit tout ce qu'on peut dire en pareille occurrence
        Il marqua leur desir pressant
  De voir sortir du Prince une heureuse Lignée
  Qui rendit à jamais leur Etat florissant,
        Il lui dit même en finissant
        Qu'il voyoit un astre naissant
        Issu de son chaste hymenée
        Qui faisoit pâlir le croissant.

  D'un ton plus simple & d'une voix moins forte
  Le Prince à ses sujets repondit de la sorte.

    Le zele ardent, dont je voi qu'en ce jour
    Vous me portez aux noeuds du mariage,
    Me fait plaisir, & m'est de vôtre Amour
        Un agreable témoignage;
        J'en suis sensiblement touché,
  Et voudrais dés demain pouvoir vous satisfaire
    Mais a mon sens l'Hymen est une affaire
  Où plus l'homme est prudent, plus il est empêché.
    Observez bien toutes les jeunes filles;
    Tant qu'elles sont au sein de leurs familles
        Ce n'est que vertu, que bonté,
        Que pudeur, que sincerité;
        Mais sitôt que le mariage
        Au deguisement a mis fin,
        Et qu'ayant fixé leur destin
        Il n'importe plus d'être sage,
        Elles quittent leur personnage,
        Non sans avoir beaucoup pati,
        Et chacune dans son ménage
        Selon son gré prend son parti.

  L'une d'humeur chagrine, & que rien ne recrée,
        Devient une devote outrée,
        Qui crie & gronde à tous momens,
        L'autre se façonne en Coquette,
        Qui sans cesse écoute ou caquette,
        Et n'a jamais assez d'Amans;
  Celle ci des beaux arts follement curieuse,
        De tout décide avec hauteur,
    Et critiquant le plus habile autheur,
        Prend la forme de Precieuse;
        Cette autre s'erige en joüeuse,
  Perd tout, argent, bijoux, bagues, meubles de prix,
        Et même jusqu'à ses habits.
  Dans la diversité des routes qu'elles tiennent
        Il n'est qu'une chose où je voi
        Qu'enfin toutes elles conviennent,
        C'est de vouloir donner la Loi.

  Or je suis convaincu que dans le mariage
        On ne peut jamais vivre heureux,
        Quand on y commande tous deux.
  Si donc vous souhaittez qu'à l'Himen je m'engage,
        Cherchez une jeune Beauté
        Sans orgueil & sans vanité,
        D'une obeïssance achevée,
        D'une patience éprouvée,
        Et qui n'ait point de volonté,
    Je la prendrai quand vous l'aurez trouvée.

  Le prince, ayant mis fin à ce discours moral,
        Monte brusquement à cheval,
        Et court joindre à perte d'haleine
  Sa meutte qui l'attend au milieu de la plaine.

  Aprés avoir passé des prés & des guerets,
  Il trouve ses chasseurs couchez sur l'herbe verte
        Tous se levent, & tous alerte,
  Font trembler de leurs cors les hôtes des forêts.
    Des chiens courans, l'abboyante famille,
    Deçà, de là, parmi le chaume brille,
        Et les Limiers à l'oeil ardent
  Qui du fort de la bête à leur poste reviennent,
        Entraînent en les regardant
        Les forts valets qui les retiennent.

        S'étant instruit par un des siens
    Si tout est prêt, si l'on est sur la trace
  Il ordonne aussitôt qu'on commence la chasse,
        Et fait donner le Cerf aux chiens.
        Le son des cors qui retentissent,
        Le bruit des chevaux qui hennissent
  Et des chiens animez les pénétrans abois,
  Remplissent la fôret de tumulte & de trouble,
  Et pendant que l'echo sans cesse les redouble,
  S'enfonçent avec eux dans les plus creux du bois.

  Le Prince par hasard ou par sa destinée,
        Prit une route détournée
        Où nul des chasseurs ne le suit;
        Plus il court, plus il s'en sépare:
        Enfin, à tel point il s'egare,
  Que des chiens & des cors il n'entend plus le bruit.

  L'Endroit où le mena sa bijarre avanture,
    Clair de ruisseaux & sombre de verdure,
  Saisissoit les Esprits d'une secrette horreur;
        La simple & naïve nature
    S'y faisoit voir & si belle & si pure,
    Que mille fois il benit son erreur.

        Rempli des douces rêveries
  Qu'inspirent les grands bois, les eaux & les prairies,
  Il sent soudain frapper & son coeur & ses yeux
        Par l'objet le plus agreable,
        Le plus doux & le plus aimable
        Qu'il eut jamais vu sous les Cieux.
        C'étoit une jeune Bergere
        Qui filoit aux bords d'un ruisseau,
        Et qui conduisant son troupeau,
        D'une main sage & menagere
        Tournoit son agile fuzeau.
  Elle auroit pû dompter les coeurs les plus sauvages;
        Des Lys, son teint a la blancheur,
        Et sa naturelle fraîcheur
  S'étoit toûjours sauvée à l'ombre des boccages:
  Sa bouche, de l'enfance avoit tout l'agrément,
  Et ses yeux qu'adoucit une brune paupiere,
        Plus bleus que n'est le firmament,
        Avoient aussi plus de lumiere.

  Le Prince, avec transport, dans le bois se glissant,
  Contemple les beautez dont son Ame est émeüe,
        Mais le bruit qu'il fait en passant
  De la belle sur lui fit détourner la veüe;
        Des qu'elle se vit apperçüe,
  D'un brillant incarnat la prompte & vive ardeur,
    De son beau teint redoubla la splendeur,
        Et sur son visage épandeüe,
        Y fit triompher la pudeur.

  Sous le voile innocent de cette honte aimable,
  Le Prince découvrit une simplicité,
    Une douceur, une sincerité,
    Dont il croyoit le beau sexe incapable,
    Et qu'il voyait dans toute leur beauté.

  Saisi d'une frayeur pour lui toute nouvelle,
  Il s'approche interdit, & plus timide qu'elle,
        Lui dit d'une tremblante voix,
  Que de tous ses veneurs il a perdu la trace,
        Et lui demande si la chasse
    N'a point passé quelque part dans le bois.
  Rien n'a paru, Seigneur, dans cette solitude,
  Dit-elle, & nul ici que vous seul n'est venu;
        Mais n'ayez point d'inquiétude,
  Je remettrai vos pas sur un chemin connu.

        De mon heureuse destinée
  Je ne puis, lui dit-il, trop rendre grace aux Dieux,
    Depuis long-tems je frequente ces lieux,
  Mais j'avois ignoré jusqu'à cette journée
        Ce qu'ils ont de plus precieux.

  Dans ce tems elle voit que le Prince se baisse
        Sur le moitte bord du ruisseau,
    Pour étancher dans le cours de son eau
        La soif ardente qui le presse;
        Seigneur, attendez un moment,
        Dit-elle, & courant promptement
    Vers sa cabane, elle y prend une tasse,
        Qu'avec joye & de bonne grace,
    Elle presente à ce nouvel Amant.

  Les vases precieux de cristal & d'agathe
        Où l'or en mille endroits éclatte,
  Et qu'un art curieux avec soin façonna:
  N'eurent jamais pour lui, dans leur pompe inutile,
    Tant de beauté que le vase d'argile
        Que la Bergere lui donna.

  Cependant pour trouver une route facile,
        Qui mene le Prince à la Ville,
  Ils traversent des bois, des rochers escarpez
        Et de torrents entrecoupez,
  Le Prince n'entre point dans de route nouvelle
  Sans en bien observer, tous les lieux d'alentour;
        Et son ingénieux Amour
            Qui songeoit au retour
        En fit une carte fidelle.
        Dans un boccage sombre & frais
        Enfin la Bergere le meine,
    Où, de dessous ses branchages épais
    Il voit au loin dans le sein de la plaine
    Les toits dorez de son riche Palais.

        S'étant separé de la Belle,
        Touché d'une vive douleur,
        A pas lents il s'éloigne d'elle
    Chargé du trait qui lui perce le coeur.
    Le souvenir de sa tendre avanture,
    Avec plaisir le conduisit chez lui,
  Mais dés le lendemain il sentit sa blessure,
  Et se vit accablé de tristesse & d'ennui.

    Dés qu'il le peut il retourne à la chasse,
        Où de sa suite adroitement
        Il s'échappe & se débarrasse
        Pour s'égarer heureusement.
  Des arbres & des monts les cimes élevées.
    Qu'avec grand soin il avoit observées,
  Et les avis secrets de son fidelle amour,
  Le guiderent si bien que malgré les traverses,
          De cent routes diverses,
  De sa jeune Bergere il trouva le séjour.
  Il sçut qu'elle n'a plus que son pere avec elle,
        Que Griselidis on l'appelle,
  Qu'ils vivent doucement du lait de leurs brebis,
  Et que de leur toison qu'elle seule elle file,
        Sans avoir recours à la Ville,
        Ils font eux-mêmes leurs habits.

        Plus il la voit plus il s'enflâme
        Des vives beautez de son ame.
  Il connoit en voyant tant de dons précieux,
        Que si sa Bergere est si belle,
        C'est qu'une legere étincelle,
  De l'esprit qui l'anime a passé dans ses yeux.

        Il ressent une joye extréme,
  D'avoir si bien placé ses premieres amours,
  Ainsi sans plus tarder, il fit dés le jour même
  Assembler son Conseil & lui tint ce discours.

        Enfin aux Loix de l'hyménée
    Suivant vos voeux je me vais engager,
  Je ne prens point ma femme en païs étranger.
  Je la prends parmi vous, belle, sage, bien née,
  Ainsi que mes ayeux ont fait plus d'une fois,
    Mais j'attendrai cette grande journée
        A vous informer de mon choix.

        Dés que la nouvelle fut sçüe,
        Partout elle fut répanduë.
    On ne peut dire avec combien d'ardeur
        L'allegresse publique
        De tous côtez s'explique;
        Le plus content fût l'Orateur,
        Qui par son discours pathetique
  Croyoit d'un si grand bien être l'unique Auteur,
    Qu'il se trouvoit homme de consequence!
  Rien ne peut resister à la grande éloquence,
        Disoit-il sans cesse en son coeur.

  Le plaisir fut de voir le travail inutile,
        Des Belles de toute la Ville
    Pour s'attirer & mériter le choix
  Du Prince leur Seigneur, q'un air chaste & modeste,
  Charmoit uniquement & plus que tout le reste,
        Ainsi qu'il l'avoit dit cent fois.

  D'habit & de maintien toutes elles changerent,
        D'un ton devot elles tousserent,
        Elles radoucirent leurs voix,
    De demi pied les coëffures baisserent,
  La gorge se couvrit, les manches s'allongerent,
  A peine on leur voyoit le petit bout des doigts.

        Dans la Ville avec diligence,
        Pour l'hymen dont le jour s'avance,
        On voit travailler tous les arts,
    Ici se font de magnifiques chars
        D'une forme toute nouvelle,
        Si beaux & si bien inventez,
        Que l'or qui par tout étincelle,
        En fait la moindre des beautez.

  Là, pour voir aisément & sans aucun obstacle,
        Toute la pompe du spectacle,
        On dresse de longs échaffaux,
        Ici de grands Arcs triomphaux,
  Où du Prince guerrier se celebre la gloire,
  Et de l'amour sur lui l'éclatante victoire.

    Là sont forgez d'un art industrieux,
  Ces feux qui par les coups d'un innocent Tonnerre,
          En effrayant la Terre,
  De mille astres nouveaux embellissent les Cieux.

        Là d'un ballet ingenieux
  Se concerte avec soin l'agreable folie,
  Et là d'un Opéra peuplé de mille dieux,
  Le plus beau que jamais ait produit l'Italie,
  On entend repeter les Airs melodieux.

        Enfin, du fameux hymené,
        Arriva la grande journée.

        Sur le fond d'un Ciel vif & pur,
        A peine l'Aurore vermeille,
        Confondoit l'or avec l'azur,
  Que par tout en sursaut le beau sexe s'eveille;
  Le peuple curieux s'épand de tous côtez,
  En differens endroits des Guardes sont postez,
        Pour contenir la populace,
        Et la contraindre à faire place.
    Tout le Palais retentit de clairons,
  De flutes, de hautbois, de rustiques musettes,
        Et l'on n'entend aux environs
        Que des tambours & des trompettes.
  Enfin le Prince sort entouré de sa Cour,
        Il s'éleve un long cri de joye,
  Mais on est bien surpris quand au premier détour,
  De la forêt prochaine on voit qu'il prend la voye,
        Ainsi qu'il faisoit chaque jour.
    Voilà, dit-on, son penchant qui l'emporte,
  Et de ses passions, en dépit de l'amour,
        La Chasse est toûjours la plus forte.

        Il traverse rapidement
  Les guerets de la plaine, & gagnant la montagne,
  Il entre dans le bois au grand étonnement
        De la Troupe qui l'accompagne.
  Après avoir passé par différens détours,
  Que son coeur amoureux se plaît à reconnaître,
    Il trouve enfin la cabane champêtre
        Où logent ses tendres amours.

    Griselidis de l'hymen informée,
        Par la voix de la Renommée,
    En avoit pris son bel habillement;
  Et pour en aller voir la pompe magnifique
        De dessous sa case rustique
        Sortoit en ce même moment.

    Où courez-vous, si prompte & si legere?
        Lui dit le prince en l'abordant,
  Cessez de vous hâter, trop aimable Bergere,
  La Nopce où vous allez, & dont je suis l'Epoux,
        Ne saurait se faire sans vous.

    Oüi, je vous aime, & je vous ai choisie
        Entre mille jeunes beautez
  Pour passer avec vous le reste de ma vie.
  Si toutefois mes voeux ne sont pas rejettez.

  Ah! dit-elle, Seigneur, je n'ai garde de croire
  Que je sois destinée à ce comble de gloire,
        Vous cherchez à vous divertir.
        Non, non, dit-il, je suis sincere,
        J'ai deja pour moi vôtre Pere.
  (Le Prince avoit eu soin de l'en faire avertir)
        Daignez Bergere y consentir,
        C'est-là tout ce qui reste à faire.
  Mais afin qu'entre nous une solide paix
        Eternellement se maintienne,
  Il faudroit me jurer que vous n'aurez jamais
        D'autre volonté que la mienne.

  Je le jure, dit-elle, & je vous le promets;
  Si j'avois épouzé le moindre du Village,
    J'obeïrois, son joug me serait doux,
        Hélas! combien donc davantage,
        Si je viens à trouver en vous,
        Et mon Seigneur et mon Epoux.

        Ainsi le Prince se déclare,
  Et pendant que la Cour applaudit à son choix,
  Il porte la Bergere à souffrir qu'on la pare
  Des ornemens qu'on donne aux Epouzes des Rois.
  Celles qu'à cet emploi leur devoir interesse,
  Entrent dans la Cabane, & là diligemment
  Mettent tout leur savoir & toute leur adresse
    A donner de la grace à chaque ajustement.
        Dans cette hutte où l'on se presse,
        Les Dames admirent sans cesse
        Avec quel art la pauvreté
        S'y cache sous la propreté;
        Et cette rustique Cabane,
  Que couvre & refraichit un spacieux Platane,
        Leur semble un séjour enchanté.

  Enfin, de ce Reduit sort pompeuse & brillante
        La Bergere Charmante,
    Ce ne sont qu'applaudissemens
    Sur sa beauté, sur ses habillemens;
        Mais sous cette pompe étrangere,
  Déja plus d'une fois le Prince a regretté
        Des ornemens de la Bergere
        L'innocente simplicité.

        Sur un grand char d'or & d'Ivoire
  La Bergere s'assied pleine de Majesté,
        Le Prince y monte avec fierté,
        Et ne trouve pas moins de gloire
  A se voir comme Amant assis à son côté,
  Qu'à marcher en triomphe aprés une victoire;
    La Cour les suit & tous gardent le rang
  Que leur donne leur charge ou l'éclat de leur sang.

  La Ville dans les champs presque toute sortie
        Couvroit les plaines d'alentour,
        Et du choix du Prince avertie,
  Avec impatience attendoit son retour,
  Il paroit, on le joint. Parmi l'épaisse foule
  Du peuple qui se fend le char à peine roule;
  Par les longs cris de joye à tout coup redoublez,
        Les chevaux émûs et troublez,
        Se cabrent, trépignent, s'élancent
        Et reculent plus qu'ils n'avancent.

        Dans le Temple on arrive enfin,
        Et là par la chaîne éternelle
        D'une promesse solennelle,
    Les deux Epoux unissent leur destin:
        Ensuite au Palais ils se rendent,
        Où mille plaisirs les attendent,
  Où la Danse, les Jeux, les Courses, les Tournois
  Repandent l'allegresse en differens endroits;
        Sur le soir le blond hymenée,
  De ses chastes douceurs couronna la journée.

    Le lendemain les differents Etats
          De toute la Province
  Accourent haranguer la Princesse & le Prince
        Par la voix de leurs Magistrats.

        De ses Dames environnée,
    Griselidis, sans paroître étonnée,
        En Princesse les entendit,
        En Princesse leur répondit.
  Elle fit toute chose avec tant de prudence,
  Qu'il sembla que le Ciel eût versé ses thrésors,
        Avec encor plus d'abondance
        Sur son Ame que sur son corps.
    Par son Esprit, par ses vives lumières,
  Du Grand monde aussitôt elle prit les maniéres,
        Et même dés le premier jour
  Des talens, de l'humeur des Dames de la Cour,
        Elle se fit si bien instruire,
    Que son bon sens jamais embarrassé
        Eut moins de peine à les conduire,
        Que ses brebis du tems passé.

  Avant la fin de l'an des fruits de l'hymenée,
    Le Ciel benit leur couche fortunée,
  Ce ne fut point un Prince, on l'eût bien souhaitté;
  Mais la jeune Princesse avoit tant de beauté,
  Que l'on ne songea plus qu'à conserver sa vie;
  Le Pere qui lui trouve un air doux & charmant,
    La venoit voir de moment en moment,
        Et la Mere encor plus ravie
        La regardoit incessamment.

    Elle voulut la nourrir elle-même,
  Ah! dit-elle, comment m'exempter de l'emploi
        Que ses cris demandent de moi,
        Sans une ingratitude extrême;
    Par un motif de Nature ennemi
  Pourrois-je bien vouloir de mon Enfant que j'aime,
        N'être la Mere qu'à demi.
  Soit que le Prince eût l'ame un peu moins enflammé
        Qu'aux premiers jours de son ardeur,
        Soit que de sa maligne humeur
        La masse se fût rallumée,
        Et de son épaisse fumée
  Eût obscurci ses sens et corrompu son Coeur;
        Dans tout ce que fait la Princesse,
  Il s'imagine voir peu de sincerité,
        Sa trop grande vertu le blesse,
  C'est un piege qu'on rend à sa credulité;
  Son Esprit inquiet & de trouble agité
        Croit tous les soupçons qu'il écoute,
    Et prend plaisir à revoquer en doute
        L'excez de sa felicité.

  Pour guerir les chagrins dont son ame est atteinte
  Il la suit, il l'observe, il aime à la troubler
        Par les ennuys de la contrainte,
        Par les alarmes de la crainte,
        Par tout ce qui peut deméler
        La verité d'avec la feinte.
    C'est trop, dit-il, me laisser endormir,
        Si ses vertus sont veritables
    Les traitemens les plus insupportables,
        Ne feront que les affermir.

    Dans son Palais il la tient reserrée,
  Loin de tous les plaisirs qui naissent à la Cour,
  Et dans sa chambre, où seule elle vit retirée,
        A peine il laisse entrer le jour.
        Persuadé que la Parure
        Et le superbe ajustement
  Du sexe, que pour plaire a formé la Nature
        Est le plus doux enchantement.
        Il lui demande avec rudesse
  Les Perles, les Rubis, les Bagues, les Bijoux
    Qu'il lui donna pour marque de tendresse,
  Lorsque de son Amant il devint son Epoux.

        Elle dont la vie est sans tache,
        Et qui n'a jamais eu d'attache
        Qu'à s'acquiter de son devoir,
        Les lui donne sans s'émouvoir.
  Et même le voyant se plaire à les reprendre,
        N'a pas moins de joye à les rendre
        Qu'elle en eût à les recevoir.

    Pour m'éprouver mon Epoux me tourmente,
  Dit-elle, & je voi bien qu'il ne me fait souffrir,
  Qu'afin de reveiller ma vertu languissante,
  Qu'un doux & long repos pourrait faire perir.
  S'il n'a pas ce dessein, du moins suis-je assurée
  Que telle est du Seigneur la conduite sur moi;
  Et que de tant de maux l'ennuyeuse durée,
  N'est que pour exercer ma constance & ma foi.
        Pendant que tant de malheureuses
        Errent au gré de leurs désirs;
        Par mille routes dangereuses.
        Aprés de faux & vains plaisirs;
  Pendant que le Seigneur dans sa lente Justice
    Les laisse aller au bord du précipice
        Sans prendre part à leur danger
  Par un pur mouvement de sa bonté suprême
    Il me choisit comme un enfant qu'il aime
        Et s'applique à me corriger.
  Aymons donc sa rigueur utilement cruelle
    On n'est heureux qu'autant qu'on a souffert;
        Aymons sa bonté paternelle
        Et la main dont elle se sert.

  Le Prince a beau la voir obeïr sans contrainte
        A tous ses ordres absolus
  Je voi le fondement de cette vertu feinte
  Dit-il, & ce qui rend tous mes coups superflus,
        C'est qu'ils n'ont porté leur atteinte
    Qu'à des endroits où son Amour n'est plus.

    Dans son Enfant, dans la jeune Princesse
        Elle a mis toute sa tendresse
    A l'éprouver si je veux reüssir
        C'est là qu'il faut que je m'adresse.
        C'est là que je puis m'éclaircir.
    Elle venait de donner la mamelle,
    Au tendre objet de son Amour ardent
  Qui couché sur son sein se joüoit avec elle,
        Et rioit en la regardant:

  Je voi que vous l'aymez, lui dit-il, cependant
  Il faut que je vous l'ôte en cet âge encor tendre
  Pour lui former les moeurs & pour la preserver
  De certains mauvais airs qu'avec vous l'on peut prendre;
        Mon heureux sort m'a fait trouver
  Une Dame d'esprit qui saura l'élever
  Dans toutes les vertus & dans la politesse
        Que doit avoir une Princesse.
        Disposez-vous à la quitter
        On va venir pour l'emporter.

  Il la laisse à ces mots, n'ayant pas le courage,
        Ni les yeux assez inhumains,
        Pour voir arracher de ses mains
        De leur Amour l'unique gage;
  Elle de mille pleurs se baigne le visage,
        Et dans un morne accablement
  Attend de son malheur le funeste moment.

  Dés que d'une action si triste & si cruelle
  Le Ministre odieux à ses yeux se montra,
        Il faut obeïr lui dit-elle,
  Puis prenant son Enfant qu'elle considera,
    Qu'elle baisa d'une ardeur maternelle,
  Qui de ses petits bras tendrement la serra,
        Toute en pleurs elle le livra.
        Ah! que sa douleur fut amere!
        Arracher l'Enfant ou le Coeur
      Du sein d'une si tendre Mere,
          C'est la même douleur.

    Prés de la Ville étoit un monastère,
        Fameux par son antiquité,
  Où des vierges vivoient dans une regle austere,
  Sous les yeux d'une Abbesse illustre en pieté.
        Ce fut là que dans le silence,
        Et sans déclarer sa naissance,
  On déposa l'Enfant & des bagues de prix,
        Sous l'espoir d'une recompense
    Digne de soins que l'on en auroit pris.

  Le Prince qui tâchoit d'éloigner par la Chasse
        Le vif remords qui l'embarrasse
        Sur l'excez de sa cruauté,
        Craignoit de revoir la Princesse,
  Comme on craint de revoir une fiere Tigresse
        A qui son faon vient d'être ôté:
        Cependant il en fut traité
        Avec douceur, avec caresse,
        Et même avec cette tendresse,
  Qu'elle eut aux plus beaux jours de sa prosperité.

  Par cette complaisance & si grande & si prompte,
    Il fut touché de regret & de honte,
    Mais son chagrin demeura le plus fort:
  Ainsi, deux jours aprés, avec des larmes feintes,
  Pour lui porter encor de plus vives atteintes,
        Il lui vient dire que la mort
  De leur aimable Enfant avoit fini le sort.

  Le coup inopiné mortellement la blesse
        Cependant malgré sa tristesse,
  Ayant veu son Epoux qui changeoit de couleur,
    Elle parut oublier son malheur,
        Et n'avoir même de tendresse
  Que pour le consoler de sa fausse douleur.

    Cette bonté, cette ardeur sans égale
          D'amitié conjugale,
  Du Prince tout à coup désarmant la rigueur
  Le touche, le pénetre, & lui change le Coeur,
        Jusques-là qu'il lui prend envie
        De déclarer que leur Enfant
        Joüit encore de la vie:
  Mais sa bile s'éleve, &, fiere lui defend
        De rien découvrir du mystere
        Qu'il peut-être utile de faire.

  Dès ce bien heureux jour telle des deux Epoux
        Fut la mutuelle tendresse,
  Qu'elle n'est point plus vive aux momens les plus doux
        Entre l'Amant & la Maîtresse.
  Quinze fois le soleil pour former les saisons,
  Habita tour à tour dans ses douze maisons,
        Sans rien voir qui les desunisse:
        Que si quelques fois par caprice
        Il prend plaisir à la facher,
        C'est seulement pour empêcher
        Que l'amour ne se ralentisse,
  Tel que le forgeron qui pressant son labeur
        Repand un peu d'eau sur la braize
        De sa languissante fournaise
        Pour en redoubler la chaleur.

        Cependant la jeune Princesse.
        Croissoit en esprit, en sagesse,
    A la douceur, à la naïveté
    Qu'elle tenoit de son aimable Mere,
    Elle joignit de son Illustre Pere
        L'agreable et noble fierté.
  L'Amas de ce qui plaît dans chaque Caractère
        Fit une parfaite beauté.

        Par tout comme un Astre elle brille,
    Et par hazard un Seigneur de la Cour,
    Jeune, bien fait & plus beau que le jour,
        L'ayant vû paroître à la Grille,
    Conçût pour elle un violent amour.
  Par l'instinct qu'au beau sexe a donné la nature,
        Et que toutes les beautez ont,
        De voir l'invisible blessure
  Que font leurs yeux, au moment qu'ils la font,
        La Princesse fut informée
        Qu'elle étoit tendrement aimée.
    Aprés avoir quelque tems resisté,
    Comme on le doit avant que de se rendre,
        D'un amour également tendre
        Elle l'aima de son côté.

    Dans cet Amant, rien n'étoit à reprendre
  Il étoit beau, vaillant, né d'illustres Ayeux
    Et dés long-tems, pour en faire son Gendre
    Sur lui le Prince avoit jetté les yeux.
  Ainsi donc avec joye il apprit la nouvelle,
        De l'ardeur tendre & mutuelle
        Dont bruloient ces jeunes Amans,
    Mais il lui prit une bizarre envie,
  De leur faire acheter par de cruels tourmens,
        Le plus grand bonheur de leur vie.

    Je me plairai, dit-il, à les rendre contens;
        Mais il faut que l'inquietude
        Par tout ce qu'elle a de plus rude,
        Rende encor leurs feux plus constans;
        De mon Epouze en même tems,
        J'exercerai la patience,
        Non point comme jusqu'à ce jour,
    Pour rasseurer ma folle défiance;
    Je ne dois plus douter de son amour:
  Mais pour faire éclatter aux yeux de tout le monde,
  Sa bonté, sa douceur, sa sagesse profonde;
  Afin que de ses dons si grands, si precieux,
        La terre se voyant parée,
        En soit de respect pénétrée,
  Et par reconnaissance en rende grace aux Cieux.

  Il déclare en public que manquant de lignée,
  En qui l'Etat un jour retrouve son Seigneur,
  Que la fille qu'il eut de son fol hymenée
        Etant morte aussi-tôt que née,
    Il doit ailleurs chercher plus de bonheur.
  Que l'Epouze qu'il prend est d'illustre naissance,
    Qu'en un Couvent on l'a jusqu'à ce jour
        Fait élever dans l'innocence,
  Et qu'il va par l'hymen couronner son amour.

    On peut juger à quel point fut cruelle
  Aux deux jeunes Amans cette affreuse nouvelle;
  Ensuite sans marquer ni chagrin ni douleur,
    Il avertit son Epouze fidelle,
        Qu'il faut qu'il se separe d'elle
    Pour éviter un extreme malheur;
  Que le peuple indigné de sa basse naissance
  Le force à prendre ailleurs une digne alliance.

        Il faut, dit-il, vous retirer
    Sous vôtre toit de chaume & de fougere
  Aprés avoir repris vos habits de Bergere,
        Que je vous ai fait preparer.
  Avec une tranquile & muëtte constance,
  La Princesse entendit prononcer sa sentence;
    Sous les dehors d'un visage serain
        Elle devoroit son chagrin,
  Et sans que la douleur diminuât ses charmes,
    De ses beaux yeux tomboient de grosses larmes,
  Ainsi que quelquefois au retour du Printems,
    Il fait soleil, & pleut en même tems.

  Vous êtes mon Epoux, mon Seigneur, & mon Maître,
  (Dit-elle en soûpirant, prête à s'évanoüir,)
  Et quelque affreux que soit ce que je viens d'ouïr,
        Je saurai vous faire connoître
  Que rien ne m'est si cher que de vous obeir.

  Dans sa chambre aussi-tôt seule elle se retire
  Et là se dépoüillant de ses riches habits,
    Elle reprend paisible & sans rien dire,
        Pendant que son coeur en soûpire,
    Ceux qu'elle avoit en gardant ses Brebis.
        En cet humble & simple équipage,
  Elle aborde le Prince & lui tient ce langage.

        Je ne puis m'éloigner de vous
    Sans le pardon d'avoir sû vous déplaire,
    Je puis souffrir le poids de ma misere,
  Mais je ne puis, Seigneur, souffrir votre courroux.
  Accordez cette grace à mon regret sincere,
  Et je vivrai contente en mon triste séjour,
        Sans que jamais le tems altere
  Ni mon humble respect, ni mon fidelle amour.
  Tant de soumission, & tant de grandeur d'ame
        Sous un si vil habillement,
  Qui dans le coeur du Prince en ce même moment
  Raveilla tous les traits de sa premiere flâme,
  Alloient casser l'arrêt de son bannissement.
        Emû par de si puissants charmes,
        Et prêt à repandre des larmes,
        Il commençoit à s'avancer,
            Pour l'embrasser.

    Quand tout à coup l'imperieuse gloire,
        D'être ferme en son sentiment
    Sur son amour remporta la victoire,
  Et le fit en ces mots répondre durement.

  De tout le temps passé j'ai perdu la mémoire,
    Je suis content de vôtre repentir,
        Allez il est tems de partir.

  Elle part aussi-tôt, & regardant son Pere,
  Qu'on avoit revêtu de son rustique habit,
  Et qui le coeur percé d'une douleur amere,
  Pleuroit un changement si prompt & si subit.
  Retournons, lui dit-elle, en nos sombres boccages,
  Retournons habiter nos demeures sauvages,
  Et quittons sans regret la pompe des Palais,
  Nos cabanes n'ont pas tant de magnificence,
    Mais on y voit régner dans l'innocence
  Un plus ferme repos, une plus douce paix.

    Dans son desert a grand'peine arrivée,
    Elle reprend & quenoüille & fuzeaux,
    Et va filer au bord des mêmes eaux
        Où le Prince l'avoit trouvée.
        Là son coeur tranquille & sans fiel,
        Cent fois le jour demande au Ciel,
  Qu'il comble son Epoux de gloire, de richesses,
  Et qu'à tous ses desirs il ne refuse rien.
        Un Amour nourri de caresses
        N'est pas plus ardent que le sien.

        Ce cher Epoux qu'elle regrette,
        Voulant encore l'éprouver,
        Lui fait dire dans sa retraite
        Qu'elle ait à le venir trouver.

  Griselidis, dit-il, dés qu'elle se présente,
  Il faut que la Princesse à qui je dois demain
        Dans le Temple donner la main,
        De vous & de moi soit contente.
  Je vous demande ici tous vos soins, & je veux
  Que vous m'aidiez à plaire à l'objet de mes voeux,
  Vous savez de quel air il faut que l'on me serve,
        Point d'épargne, point de reserve,
  Que tout sente le Prince, & le Prince amoureux.
        Employez toute votre adresse
        A parer son appartement,
        Que l'abondance, la richesse,
        La propreté, la politesse
        S'y fasse voir également;
        Enfin songez incessamment
        Que c'est une jeune Princesse
            Que j'aime tendrement.

        Pour vous faire entrer davantage
        Dans les soins de vôtre devoir,
        Je veux ici vous faire voir
  Celle qu'à bien servir mon ordre vous engage.
        Telle qu'aux portes du Levant
        Se montre la naissante Aurore,
        Telle parut en arrivant
        La Princesse plus belle encore.
        Griselidis à son abord
  Dans le fond de son coeur sentit un doux transport
        De la tendresse maternelle;
    Du tems passé, de ses jours bienheureux,
    Le souvenir en son coeur se rappelle,
    Helas! ma fille, en soi-même, dit-elle,
  Si le Ciel favorable eût écouté mes voeux,
  Seroit presqu'aussi grande & peut-être aussi belle!

  Pour la jeune Princesse en ce même moment,
  Elle prit un amour si vif, si vehement,
        Qu'aussi-tôt qu'elle fut absente,
    En cette sorte au Prince elle parla,
  Suivant sans le savoir, l'instinct qui s'en mêla.
    Souffrez, Seigneur, que je vous represente,
        Que cette Princesse charmante,
        Dont vous allez être l'Epoux,
  Dans l'aise, dans l'éclat, dans la pourpre nourrie,
  Ne pourra supporter, sans en perdre la vie,
  Les mêmes traittements que j'ai reçû de vous.
        Le besoin, ma naissance obscure,
        M'avoient endurcie aux travaux
  Et je pouvois souffrir toutes sortes de maux
        Sans peine & même sans murmure;
  Mais elle qui jamais n'a connu la douleur,
    Elle mourra dés la moindre rigueur,
  Dés la moindre parole un peu seche, peu dure,
        Hélas! Seigneur, je vous conjure,
        De la traitter avec douceur.

  Songez, lui dit le Prince avec un ton severe,
    A me servir selon votre pouvoir,
    Il ne faut pas qu'une simple Bergere
    Fasse des leçons, & s'ingere,
        De m'avertir de mon devoir.
    Griselidis à ces mots sans rien dire,
        Baisse les yeux et se retire.

  Cependant pour l'hymen les Seigneurs invitez,
        Arriverent de tous côtez,
        Dans une magnifique salle
        Où le Prince les assembla;
  Avant que d'allumer la torche nuptiale,
        En cette sorte il leur parla.
        Rien au monde aprés l'esperance;
        N'est plus trompeur que l'apparence:
  Ici l'on en peut voir un exemple éclatant,
    Qui ne croiroit que ma jeune Maîtresse,
        Que l'hymen va rendre Princesse,
  Ne soit heureuse & n'ait le coeur content?
        Il n'en est rien pourtant.

    Qui pourrait s'empêcher de croire,
  Que ce jeune Guerrier amoureux de la gloire,
  N'aime à voir cet hymen, lui qui dans les Tournois
  Va sur tous ses Rivaux remporter la victoire,
        Cela n'est pas vrai toutefois.

  Qui ne croiroit encor qu'en sa juste colere,
  Griselidis ne pleure & ne se desespere?
  Elle ne se plaint point, elle consent à tout.
  Et rien n'a pû pousser sa patience à bout.

  Qui ne croiroit enfin que de ma destinée,
  Rien ne peut égaler la course fortunée,
  En voyant les appas de l'objet de mes voeux?
  Cependant si l'hymen me lioit de ses noeuds,
    J'en concevrois une douleur profonde,
        Et de tous les Princes du monde,
        Je serois le plus malheureux.

  L'énigme vous paroit difficile à comprendre,
        Deux mots vont vous la faire entendre,
    Et ces deux mots feront évanoüir
    Tous les malheurs que vous venez d'oüir.

  Sachez, poursuivit-il, que l'aimable personne
    Que vous croyez m'avoir blessé le coeur,
        Est ma fille, & que je la donne
        Pour femme à ce jeune Seigneur,
        Qui l'aime d'un amour extréme,
        Et dont il est aimé de même.

    Sachez encor, que touché vivement
        De la patience & du zèle
        De l'Epouze sage & fidelle
        Que j'ai chassée indignement,
    Je la reprens, afin que je repare,
  Par tout ce que l'amour peut avoir de plus doux,
        Le traittement dur & barbare
    Qu'elle a reçû de mon esprit jaloux.
        Plus grande sera mon étude,
        A prevenir tous ses desirs
    Qu'elle ne fut dans mon inquietude,
        A l'accabler de déplaisirs;
  Et si dans tous les tems doit vivre la mémoire
  Des ennuis dont son coeur ne fut point abattu,
  Je veux que plus encore on parle de la gloire,
  Dont j'aurai couronné sa supréme vertu.

        Comme quand un épais nuage
          A le jour obscurci,
    Et que le Ciel de toutes parts noirci,
        Menace d'un affreux orage;
  Si de ce voile obscur par les vents écarté,
        Un brillant rayon de clarté,
        Se repand sur le Païsage,
        Tout rit & reprend sa beauté,
  Telle dans tous les yeux où régnoit la tristesse
  Eclatte tout à coup une vive allegresse.

        Par ce prompt éclaircissement
        La jeune Princesse ravie
  D'apprendre que du Prince elle a reçû la vie,
  Se jette à ses genoux qu'elle embrasse ardemment,
  Son pere qu'attendrit une fille si chere,
  La releve, la baise, & la meine à sa mere,
  A qui trop de plaisir en un même moment,
        Otoit presque tout sentiment.
        Son coeur qui tant de fois en proye
        Aux plus cuisans traits du malheur,
        Supporta si bien la douleur,
        Succombe au doux poids de la joye;
  A peine de ses bras pouvoit-elle serrer
    L'aimable Enfant que le Ciel lui renvoye,
        Elle ne pouvoit que pleurer.

  Assez dans d'autres tems vous pourrez satisfaire,
    Lui dit le Prince, aux tendresses du sang,
  Reprenez les habits qu'exige votre rang,
        Nous avons des nopces à faire.
  Au Temple on conduisit les deux jeunes Amans,
        Où la mutuelle promesse
        De se cherir avec tendresse,
  Affermit pour jamais leurs doux engagemens,
  Ce ne sont que plaisirs, que Tournois magnifiques,
        Que jeux, que dances, que musiques,
        Et que Festins delicieux,
  Où sur Griselidis se tournent tous les yeux,
        Où sa patience éprouvée,
        Jusques au Ciel est élevée,
        Par mille éloges glorieux:
  Des peuples réjoüis la complaisance est telle,
        Pour leur Prince capricieux;
  Qu'ils vont jusqu'à loüer son épreuve cruelle,
        A qui d'une vertu si belle,
  Si seante au beau sexe, & si rare en tous lieux,
        On doit un si parfait modele.




  A MONSIEUR ----

  EN LUI ENVOYANT

  _GRISELIDIS_.


Si je m'étois rendu à tous les differens avis qui m'ont été donnez sur
l'ouvrage que je vous envoye, il n'y seroit rien demeuré que le Conte
tout sec & tout uni, & en ce cas j'aurois mieux fait de n'y pas toucher
& de le laisser dans son papier bleu, où il est depuis tant d'années. Je
le lûs d'abord à deux de mes amis. Pourquoi, dit l'un, s'étendre si fort
sur le caractere de vôtre Héros, qu'a-t-on affaire de savoir ce qu'il
faisoit le matin dans son conseil, & moins encore à quoi il se
divertissoit l'aprésdînée.

Tout cela est bon à retrancher. Otez-moi, je vous prie, dit l'autre, la
réponse enjoüée qu'il fait aux Deputes de son peuple, qui le pressent de
se marier; elle ne convient point à une Prince grave & serieux: vous
voulez bien encore, poursuivit-il, que je vous conseille de supprimer la
longue description de vôtre chasse? Qu'importe tout cela au fond de
votre histoire? Croyez-moi ce sont de vains & ambitieux ornemens qui
apauvrissent vôtre Poëme au lieu de l'enrichir. Il en est de même
ajoûta-t-il, des préparatifs qu'on fait pour le mariage du Prince, tout
cela est oiseux, & inutile. Pour vos Dames qui rabaissent leurs
coëffures, qui couvrent leurs gorges, & qui allongent leurs manches,
froide plaisanterie! Aussi bien que celle de l'Orateur qui s'applaudit
de son éloquence: je demande encore, reprit celui qui avoit parlé le
premier, que vous ôtiez les reflexions Chrêtiennes de Griselidis, qui
dit, que c'est Dieu qui veut l'éprouver, c'est un sermon hors de sa
place. Je ne saurois encore souffrir les inhumanitez de vôtre Prince,
elles me mettent en colere, je les supprimerois. Il est vrai qu'elles
sont de l'histoire; mais il n'importe. J'ôterois encor l'Episode du
jeune Seigneur qui n'est là que pour épouzer la jeune Princesse, cela
allonge trop vôtre Conte; Mais lui dis-je, le Conte finiroit mal sans
cela. Je ne saurois que vous dire, répondit-il, je ne laisserois pas que
de l'ôter.

A quelques jours de là je fis la même lecture à deux autres de mes amis,
qui ne me dirent pas un seul mot sur les endroits dont je viens de
parler, mais qui en reprirent quantité d'autres. Bien loin de me
plaindre de la rigueur de vôtre Critique, leur dis-je, je me plains de
ce qu'elle n'est pas assez severe, vous m'avez passé une infinité
d'endroits que l'on trouve tres dignes de censure. Comme quoi,
dirent-ils? On trouve leur dis-je, que le caractère du Prince est trop
étendu, & qu'on n'a que faire de savoir ce qu'il faisoit le matin &
encore moins l'aprésdînée. On se moque de vous, dirent-ils tous deux
ensemble, quand on vous fait de semblables critiques. On blâme,
poursuivis-je, la réponse que fait le Prince à ceux qui le pressent de
se marier, comme trop enjoüée & indigne d'un Prince grave & sérieux.
Bon, reprit l'un d'eux, & où est l'inconvenient qu'un jeune prince
d'Italie, païs où l'on est accoûtumé à voir les hommes les plus graves &
les plus élevez en dignité dire des plaisanteries, & qui d'ailleurs fait
profession de mal parler, & des femmes & du mariage, matieres si
sujettes à la raillerie, se soit un peu réjoüi sur cet article. Quoi
qu'il en soit je vous demande grace pour cet endroit comme pour celui de
l'Orateur qui croyoit avoir converti le Prince, & pour le rabaissement
des coëffures; car ceux qui n'ont pas aimé la réponce enjouée du Prince
ont bien la mine d'avoir fait main basse sur ces deux endroits-là. Vous
l'avez deviné, lui dis-je. Mais d'un autre côté, ceux qui n'aiment que
les choses plaisantes n'ont pû souffrir les reflexions Chrétiennes de la
Princesse, qui dit que c'est Dieu qui la veut éprouver. Ils pretendent
que c'est un sermon hors de propos. Hors de propos? reprit l'autre; non
seulement ces reflexions sont necessaires au sujet: mais elles y sont
absolument necessaires. Vous aviez besoin de rendre croyable la patience
de vôtre Héroïne, & quel autre moyen aviez-vous que de lui faire
regarder les mauvais traitemens de son Epoux comme venans de la main de
Dieu? Sans cela on la prendroit pour la plus stupide de toutes les
femmes, ce qui ne feroit pas assurement un bon effet.

On blâme encore leur dis-je l'Episode du jeune Seigneur qui épouse la
jeune Princesse. On a tort reprit-il, comme vôtre ouvrage est un
veritable Poëme, quoique vous lui donniez le titre de nouvelle, il faut
qu'il n'y ait rien à desirer quand il finit. Cependant si la jeune
Princesse s'en retournoit dans son Couvent sans être mariée aprés s'y
être attenduë, elle ne seroit point contente, ni ceux qui liroient la
nouvelle:

Ensuite de cette conference, j'ai pris le parti de laisser mon ouvrage
tel à peu prés qu'il a été lû dans l'Academie. En un mot j'ai eu soin de
corriger les choses qu'on m'a fait voir être mauvaises en elles-mêmes;
mais à l'égard de celles que j'ai trouvé n'avoir point d'autre défaut
que de n'être pas au goût de quelques personnes peut-être un peu trop
délicates, j'ai crü n'y devoir pas toucher.

  _Est-ce une raison décisive
  D'ôter un bon mets d'un repas,
  Parce qu'il s'y trouve un convive
  Qui par malheur ne l'aime pas?
  Il faut que tout le monde vive,
  Et que les mets, pour plaire à tous,
  Soient differens comme les goûts._

Quoi qu'il en soit, j'ai crû devoir m'en remettre au public, qui juge
toûjours bien. J'apprendrai de lui ce que j'en dois croire, & je suivrai
exactement tous ses avis, s'il m'arrive jamais de faire une seconde
édition de cet ouvrage.


  FINIS.




  INTERNATIONAL FOLKLORE

  _An Arno Press Collection_


Allies, Jabez. On The Ancient British, Roman, and Saxon Antiquities and
Folk-Lore of Worcestershire. 1852

Blair, Walter and Franklin J. Meine, editors. Half Horse Half Alligator.
1956

Bompas, Cecil Henry, translator. Folklore of the Santal Parganas. 1909

Bourne, Henry. Antiquitates Vulgares; Or, The Antiquities of the Common
People. 1725

Briggs, Katharine Mary. The Anatomy of Puck. 1959

Briggs, Katharine Mary. Pale Hecate's Team. 1962

Brown, Robert. Semitic Influence in Hellenic Mythology. 1898

Busk, Rachel Harriette. The Folk-Songs of Italy. 1887

Carey, George. A Faraway Time and Place. 1971

Christiansen, Reidar Th. The Migratory Legends. 1958

Clouston, William Alexander. Flowers From a Persian Garden, and Other
Papers. 1890

Colcord, Joanna Carver. Sea Language Comes Ashore. 1945

Dorson, Richard Mercer, editor. Davy Crockett. 1939

Douglas, George Brisbane, editor. Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales. 1901

Gaidoz, Henri and Paul Sébillot. Blason Populaire De La France. 1884

Gardner, Emelyn Elizabeth. Folklore From the Schoharie Hills, New York.
1937

Gill, William Wyatt. Myths and Songs From The South Pacific. 1876

Gomme, George Laurence. Folk-Lore Relics of Early Village Life. 1883

Grimm, Jacob and Wilhelm. Deutsche Sagen. 1891

Gromme, Francis Hindes. Gypsy Folk-Tales. 1899

Hambruch, Paul. Faraulip. 1924

Ives, Edward Dawson. Larry Gorman. 1964

Jansen, William Hugh. Abraham "Oregon" Smith. 1977

Jenkins, John Geraint. Studies in Folk Life. 1969

Kingscote, Georgiana and Pandit Natêsá Sástrî, compilers. Tales of the
Sun. 1890

Knowles, James Hinton. Folk-Tales of Kashmir. 1893

Lee, Hector Haight. The Three Nephites. 1949

MacDougall, James, compiler. Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and
English. 1910

Mather, Increase. Remarkable Providences Illustrative of the Earlier
Days of American Colonisation. 1856

McNair, John F.A. and Thomas Lambert Barlow. Oral Tradition From the
Indus. 1908

McPherson, Joseph McKenzie. Primitive Beliefs in the North-East of
Scotland. 1929

Miller, Hugh. Scenes and Legends of the North of Scotland. 1869

Müller, Friedrich Max. Comparative Mythology. 1909

Palmer, Abram Smythe. The Samson-Saga and Its Place in Comparative
Religion. 1913

Parker, Henry. Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon. Three volumes. 1910-1914

Parkinson, Thomas. Yorkshire Legends and Traditions. 1888

Perrault, Charles. Popular Tales. 1888

Rael, Juan B. Cuentos Españoles de Colorado y Nuevo Méjico. Two volumes.
1957

Ralston, William Ralston Shedden. Russian Folk-Tales. 1873

Rhys Davids, Thomas William, translator. Buddhist Birth Stories; Or,
Jâtaka Tales. 1880

Ricks, George Robinson. Some Aspects of the Religious Music of the
United States Negro. 1977

Swynnerton, Charles. Indian Nights' Entertainment, Or Folk-Tales From
the Upper Indus. 1892

Sydow, Carl Wilhelm von. Selected Papers on Folklore. 1948

Taliaferro, Harden E. Fisher's River (North Carolina) Scenes and
Characters. 1859

Temple, Richard Carnac. The Legends of the Panjâb. Three volumes.
1884-1903

Tully, Marjorie F. and Juan B. Rael. An Annotated Bibliography of
Spanish Folklore in New Mexico and Southern Colorado. 1950

Wratislaw, Albert Henry, translator. Sixty Folk-Tales From Exclusively
Slavonic Sources. 1889

Yates, Norris W. William T. Porter and the Spirit of the Times. 1957




    Transcriber's notes:

 Punctuation has been standardized.
 Elipses and asterisks replaced with '----' to indicate omitted names.
 Except as noted below, non-standard spelling in English and French was
  retained:

  Changes:
  'faery' to 'fairy' for consistency in text.
    ...from the world of fairy,...
  'Perrrault's' to 'Perrault's':
    ...before Perrault's unembroidered...
  'fairy-tales' to 'fairy tales' for consistency in text.
  'folk-lore' and 'folk lore' to 'folklore' for consistency in
    text, except when used in the title of a cited work.
  'folk-tale' and 'folktale' to 'folk tale' for consistency in
    text, except when used in the title of a cited work.
  'illtreated' to 'ill-treated':
    ...who was ill-treated by his other...
  'may be' to 'maybe':
    ...even connected, maybe, with her dead mother...
  'Panschatantra' to 'Pantschatantra':
    ...like the _Pantschatantra_ and the _Hitopadesa_,...
  'Prjncesse' to 'Princesse':
    ...la petite Princesse toutes les Fées...
  'Ces d'effenses n'estoient' to 'Ces deffenses n'estoient':
    ...Ces deffenses n'estoient pas necessaires,...
  'chevilette' and 'chevillete' to 'chevillette' for consistency
    with remaining text:
    ...tire la chevillette, la bobinette...
  'fraiche' and 'frâiche' to 'fraîche' for consistency with
    remaining text:
    ...la chair fraîche...
  'il' to 'ils':
    ...d'où ils se relevoient...
  'Bomme' to 'Comme':
    ...Comme une rave le ratisse,...
  'out' to 'ont':
    ...Ce qu'ils ont de plus precieux...
    ...Ainsi que mes ayeux ont fait plus d'une fois...
  'Yeux' to 'Jeux'
    ...Où la Danse, les Jeux, les Courses,...
  'faire faire' to 'faire':
    ...me faire une paire de Bottes...
  'et &' to 'et':
    ...un jeune et vaillant Prince...

 Other alterations and notes:
  Footnote anchor #42 was placed at the end of the preceding section in
   the original; moved to the beginning of the ensuing story.
  In Lang's analysis of 'Hop o' my Thumb,' there is no subparagraph (3)
   in the original.  Ensuing subparagraphs were not renumbered.
  Changed 'Autre Moralité' of 'La Barbe bleüe' from caps to upper/lower
   case for consistency with remaining text.
  Deleted thought breaks between stanzas of the poem, 'Les Souhaits
   Ridicules.'
  Used 'â' in Jâtaka Tales to represent macron over the letter 'a'.




    Notes au lecteur:

 En général, cette version électronique reprend l'intégralité du texte
 de la version papier, sauf pour les changes suivants:

  Changes:
  «faery» à «fairy» pour uniformité de texte:
    ...from the world of fairy,...
  «Perrrault's» à «Perrault's»:
    ...before Perrault's unembroidered...
  «fairy-tales» à «fairy tales» pour uniformité de texte.
  «folk-lore» et «folk lore» à «folklore» pour uniformité de texte sauf
    pour les titres d'oeuvres.
  «folk-tale» et «folktale» à «folk tale» pour uniformité de texte sauf
    pour les titres d'oeuvres.
  «illtreated» à «ill-treated»:
    ...who was ill-treated by his other...
  «may be» à «maybe»:
    ...even connected, maybe, with her dead mother...
  «Panschatantra» à «Pantschatantra»:
    ...like the _Pantschatantra_ and the _Hitopadesa_,...
  «Prjncesse» à «Princesse»:
    ...la petite Princesse toutes les Fées...
  «Ces d'effenses n'estoient» à «Ces deffenses n'estoient»:
    ...Ces deffenses n'estoient pas necessaires,...
  «chevilette» et «chevillete» à «chevillette» pour uniformité de texte:
    ...tire la chevillette, la bobinette...
  «fraiche» et «frâiche» à «fraîche» pour uniformité de texte:
    ...la chair fraîche...
  «il» à «ils»:
    ...d'où ils se relevoient...
  «Bomme» à «Comme»:
    ...Comme une rave le ratisse,...
  «out» à «ont»:
    ...Ce qu'ils ont de plus precieux...
    ...Ainsi que mes ayeux ont fait plus d'une fois...
  «Yeux» à «Jeux»
    ...Où la Danse, les Jeux, les Courses,...
  «faire faire» à «faire»:
    ...me faire une paire de Bottes...
  «et &» à «et»:
    ...un jeune et vaillant Prince...

  Autres changes et notes:
   Dans l'original, annotation #42 est placée au fin de la section
    précédent; changé au commencement de la conte suivante.
   Dans l'analyse de «Hop 'o my Thumb,» il n'y a pas de paragraphe (3).
    Les nombres des paragraphes suivants ne sont pas changés.
   Changé «Autre Moralité» de «La Barbe bleüe» de majuscule à miniscule,
    pour uniformité de text.
   Suprimpré les astérisques entre les strophes de «Les Souhaits
    Ridicules».
   Utilisé 'â' dans Jâtaka Tales au lieu de ligne au-dessus de 'a'.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POPULAR TALES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


