The Project Gutenberg EBook of Kopciuszek, by Jacob Grimm and Wilhelm Grimm

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Kopciuszek
       Basn fantastyczna

Author: Jacob Grimm
        Wilhelm Grimm

Illustrator: Henryk Tom

Translator: Boleslaw Londynski

Release Date: February 10, 2009 [EBook #28044]

Language: Polish

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KOPCIUSZEK ***




Produced by Jimmy O'Regan (Produced from images generously
made available by CBN Polona http://www.polona.pl)








BIBLJOTECZKA DLA DZIECI

BR. GRIMM




KOPCIUSZEK

BAŚŃ FANTASTYCZNA.

Spolszczył M. Rościszewski
Z rysunkami H. Toma.


WYDAWNICTWO KSIĘGARNI F. KORNA
W WARSZAWIE MARSZAŁKOWSKA 65.

Drukarnia „REKORD”, Warszawa.


KOPCIUSZEK

Żadna z bajek całego świata nie cieszy się takim rozgłosem, jak
fantastyczna baśń Grimma p. t. Kopciuszek.

Różni różnie opowiadają bajkę, ale my opowiemy ją tak, jak nam ją kiedyś
opowiadała poczciwa i nigdy nie zapomniana nianiusia.

Za górami, za lasami, a w każdym razie hen, na dalekim wschodzie,
mieszkała na wsi zamożna wdowa, mająca dwie córki i pasierbicę Rózię.
Córki nie były ładne, ale chciały się wszystkim podobać, więc
zaniedbując gospodarstwo i pracę domową, cały czas spędzały tylko na
strojeniu się przed lustrem i na różnych zabawach. Że zaś pannom tym
nieustannie potrzebna była służąca do grzania rurek, do prania i
prasowania drobiazgów, do czyszczenia bucików i sukien, przeto cały
ciężar tej roboty zwalił się na Rózię, przyrodnią siostrę panien.

Matka ich pomimo całej zamożności, nie mogła podołać wydatkom na
wszystkie potrzeby córek, a że wywoływało to zły humor, przeto pastwiła
się nad swoją nieszczęsną pasierbicą Rózią, która dość często
otrzymywała od niej potężnego szturchańca. Rózia była bardzo ładną,
smukłą i zgrabną dziewczyną, ale używana do ciężkiej pracy, często
musiała przebywać w kuchni, pilnować garnków, grzebać się w węglach i
wogóle spełniać roboty najpośledniejsze. Zdarzało się więc, że często
była zamorusana i tak obdarta jak żebraczka. Od kopcia, jaki czernił jej
buzię przez ciągłe przebywanie w kuchni, siostry przezwały ją
Kopciuszkiem i nazwa ta tak się z nią zrosła, że nikt inaczej nie wołał
na nią, jak: Kopciuszku daj, Kopciuszku zrób, Kopciuszku leć, Kopciuszku
przynieś!

Rózia sama zapomniała swego imienia, ale jednak nie godziła się ze swoim
losem. Czuła ona, że jej się dzieje krzywda i nieraz myślała sobie o
poprawieniu losu. Że jednak miała serce złote, z pokorą przeto znosiła
doznawane przykrości, dogadzając nietylko macosze i siostrom, ale
pamiętając zarazem o domowych zwierzątkach, a nawet o głodnych ptaszkach
za oknami domu. Żebraka nigdy nie pominęła ażeby się z nim kawałkiem
suchego chleba nie podzielić, a chorym sąsiadom, zawsze umiała tak się
przysłużyć, że wszyscy, wychwalali jej dobroć. A że ludzie dobrzy,
zawsze otrzymują nagrodę na tym świecie, przeto nie uznawana przez
siostry i macochę, Rózia, zdobyła sobie potężną opiekunkę w postaci
jednej z czarodziejek, która tylko czekała sposobności, ażeby wywrzeć
potęgę swego gniewu na winnych a niegodziwych. Sposobność ta zdarzyła
się właśnie wtedy, gdy monarcha nowego państwa, w którem się to działo,
postanowił ożenić swojego syna.

Syn ten, książę Krasnolicy, miał sobie wybrać dozgonną towarzyszkę życia
z liczby dziewcząt całego kraju, które król Ćwieczek, jego ojciec,
zaprosił do siebie wraz z rodzinami na wspaniały festyn, tak samo ze
sfery niższej, jak i wyższej.

Przy rozsyłaniu zaproszeń nie pomi-nięto i macochy Rózi wraz z jej
córkami.--Kopciuszkowi, serce się z żalu ścisnęło, gdy macocha
oświadczyła, że zabierze z sobą tylko dwie córki do dworu, a Rózia w
domu zostanie. Siostry wykpiły Kopciuszka i poprostu pojąć nie mogły
takiej bezczelności z jej strony, ażeby taka służąca im dorównać
chciała! Cóż było robić? Rózia zmartwiła się ale, jak zwykle, żale swoje
stłumiła w sobie i pokorniutko zaczęła pomagać siostrom w
przygotowaniach do balu.

Kiedy już panny były prawie gotowe, kiedy z liczby kilkunastu sukienek
zdecydowały się wybrać co najwspanialsze, Kopciuszek widząc, że i dla
niej jeszcze znalazłaby się piękna suknia, rzecze do macochy:

--Mamusiu droga, weź i mnie na bal z siostrami!

--Ach, brudasie jeden, czego ci znowu się zachciewa!--ofuknęła macocha,
uderzywszy dziewczynę w plecy:--Pójdziesz, ale najpierw z tego popiołu
wybierz mak do czysta.

Co mówiąc, wsypała do popiołu maku wymieszała razem i postawiła przed
zapłakanym Kopciuszkiem.

Po wyjściu macochy, Rózia zaczęła wybierać mak, ale robota była tak
ciężka, że i za rok by jej nie skończyła. Usiadła więc pod oknem i
płacze. Na to gołębie, karmione codziennie przez nią, zastukały w okno i
mówią:

--Puść, nas, puść, Kopciuszku, to ci pomożemy.

Rózia wpuściła do kuchni gołąbki, które natychmiast powybierały mak z
popiołu i wesoło gruchając, sfrunęły znów na dziedziniec.

--Mamusiu droga, mak już wybrany!--zawołała Rózia:--Pójdę na bal, pójdę!

--Co? ty, na bal? A ktoby cię tam wpuścił?--zadrwiły z niej siostry.

--Za mało widocznie wsypałam ci popiołu i maku,--rzekła macocha: bo
inaczej całą noc siedzieć byś musiała. My wyjeżdżamy, a, jeżeli za
powrotem nie zastanę wybranego tego oto maku, to mi się nie pokazuj na
oczy!

I jeszcze raz oknem wleciały gołąbki i mak z popiołu wybrały, a widząc
płacz dziewczyny, szepnęły jej na pożegnanie.

--Niech sobie jadą, a ty siedź cicho i bądź spokojna. Będziesz na balu,
już my ci to zrobimy.

Spojrzała wdzięcznym wzrokiem za ptaszkami, wyprawiła siostry z domu i
macochę, siadła pod piecem, zamyśliła się i znużona pracą usnęła: śniła
o balu, na który pójść jej nie pozwolono; Wtem zrywa się na równe nogi,
bo przed jej okiem zabłysło coś złotem i srebrem, jakaś nieziemska
postać stanęła pośrodku kuchni.

Była to Baba-Dziwo, czarnoksiężniczka. Młoda i piękna, że oczu od niej
trudno było oderwać, miała wspaniałą, złocistą gwiazdę nad czołem; całą
jej postać otulał niebieski płaszcz srebrem tkany, a brylantami zdobne
trzewiczki stopy jej stroiły. W ręce trzymała laskę czarnoksięską, którą
dotknęła Kopciuszka.

--Pójdź ze mną Kopciuszku,--rzekła słodkim głosem,--ubiorę cię i wyślę
na dwór królewski.

Doszły do jakiegoś dębu, a Baba-Dziwo stuknęła w drzewo po trzykroć
swoją pałeczką.

Dąb się otworzył i oczom olśnionej Rózi, ukazały się piękne, wymarzone
szaty, tak cudne, że chyba cudniejszych nie było na świecie. Pantofelki
były jakby szklane, bo były z samych djamentów.

W jednej chwili, bez najmniejszego trudu, dziewczyna została umytą,
ubraną i wypiękniała tak, że nikt by jej poznać nie mógł.

Sama wieszczka zawołała nawet:

--Ach, jakaś ty piękna!

--O, nie piękniejsza od pani--rzekł skromnie Kopciuszek. I chciała w
rączkę pocałować wieszczkę, ale ta znikła jej z oczu.

Natomiast zajechał śliczny powóz, zaprzężony w cztery cudnie przybrane
ogiery, i już miała doń wsiąść Rózia, gdy głos Wieszczki dał się słyszeć
tuż nad jej uchem:

--Pamiętaj, że z balu masz do domu wrócić przed północą najpóźniej, bo
czary wówczas stracą moc i obdarta i brudna ukazałabyś się wszystkim na
sali.

--Będę pamiętała!--odparł Kopciuszek. Żywo wsiadła do powozu, a rącze
ogiery szybko popędziły w dal.

Festyn króla Ćwieczka, ojca księcia Krasnolicego, należał do rzędu
największych uroczystości, jakie król ten wydał kiedykolwiek w kraju.

Ale dziwić się nie można, bo wszak okazja była wyjątkowa.--Jego
królewska wysokość, książę następca tronu, królewicz Krasnolicy,
wybierał sobie żonę z pośród najpowabniejszych panien królestwa.

A jednak książę Krasnolicy wzgardził wszystkiem, a natomiast wyróżnił...
kogo? Naszego ukochanego Kopciuszka! Bo właśnie w chwili, gdy się tańce
ogólne rozpocząć miały, piękna nieznajoma wkroczyła na salę balową i
odrazu powszechną zwróciła na siebie uwagę.

Krasnolicy, patrząc na nią, bladł i rumienił się na przemian, tak wielce
był wzruszony; na razie nie miał odwagi przybliżyć się do niej. Gdy się
przemógł jednak, gdy ją poprosił do tańca i gdy pokręcił się z nią
dookoła sali, już był tak rozkochany, że nic go od niej nie było w
stanie oderwać. Zaraz jął się pytać skąd jest, z jakiego kraju pochodzi,
ale Kopciuszek uśmiechnął się tylko, nie zdradzając ani jednem słowem
swego pochodzenia.

Macocha i siostry wpatrywały się w nią z podziwem i zazdrością, ale ani
przypuszczały, że to jest ta sponiewierana Rózia, pozostawiona w domu
przed miską maku i popiołu.

Czas leciał niepostrzeżenie. Nagle, Rózia spojrzała na zegar. Do północy
brakowało zaledwie pięciu minut.

Przerażona wysunęła się z rąk Królewicza i wybiegła na dziedziniec do
swego powozu. Ale śpiesząc się, na progu zgubiła jeden ze szklanych
pantofelków i utykając zlekka wpadła do powozu i odjechała do domu.

Zaledwie weszła do kuchni już pozbawiona swych ozdób, było już parę
minut po północy, usiadła niby do zadanej roboty i wkrótce doczekała się
powrotu z balu sióstr i macochy.

Chcąc się pochwalić przed Kopciuszkiem, co też to one użyły, jęły
opowiadać o cudnej zabawie, aż nareszcie wspomniały o prześlicznie
wystrojonej dziewicy, która przed samą północą uciekła z balu i swoją
ucieczką wszystkie humory zwarzyła.

--Ale to nic,--dodała macocha,--król Ćwieczek wyda drugi festyn, a wtedy
jedna z was, córeczki drogie, musi dostać koronę!

Nazajutrz, od samego rana, specjalny goniec królewski obiegał wszystkie
domy i dworki, szukając właścicielki zgubionego trzewiczka, gdyż
królewicz z nią tylko postanowił się ożenić.

Niestety, pantofelek nie pasował na żadną nóżkę okolicznych dziewic.

Macocha Kopciuszka starała się, o ile możności, wciągnąć pantofelek na
nogi swoich kochanych córeczek, ale było to niepodobieństwem. I już
goniec miał dworek wdowy opuścić, gdy wtem spostrzega w kuchni przy
piecu jej pasierbicę.

--A to co za panienka?--zapytuje.

--To moja pasierbica, używam ją tylko do pomocy w kuchni, bo i nieładna
i rozumu nie posiada, odparła wdowa niechętnie.

--To nic nie szkodzi, rzekł goniec, rozkaz dany mi przez królewicza jest
tego rodzaju, że żadnej panienki pomijać nie wolno.

Zażądał więc stanowczo, ażeby i pasierbica wdowy przyszła do pokoju i
spróbowała włożyć pantofelek.

Weszło dziewczątko krokiem pewnym i choć usmolona, nie zawstydziła się
królewskiego sługi, bo praca nikogo nie hańbi.

Śmiało wsunęła nóżkę w pantofelek szklany--i, o dziwo! wszedł--i nadał
się wyśmienicie.

Zdziwiona i ze złości prawie od zmysłów odchodząca macocha i siostry
przyrodnie, musiały patrzeć bezsilnie, jak zabiedzony Kopciuszek, to
nieszczęsne, wzgardzone przez nich dziewczę, wsiadła do karety i jak ją
powieziono na ślub z królewiczem. Ślub ten odbył się niebawem, a młodzi
małżonkowie byli najszczęśliwszymi na kuli ziemskiej.




    „BIBLJOTECZKA DLA DZIECI”

    pod redakcją

    TADEUSZA KOŃCZYCA

    zawiera:

    BAJKI, POWIASTKI, BAŚNIE, LEGENDY, OPOWIADANIA I KOMEDYJKI.

    Z rysunkami HENRYKA TOMA.

    KOMEDYJKI:

101. CZERWONY KAPTUREK w 3-ch aktack.

102. KONIK POLNY. PSZCZOŁA I MRÓWKA, w 1 akcie.

103. KSIĘŻNICZKA WZOROWA, w jednym akcie.

104. KOT, ŁASICZKA i KRÓLIK, w jednym akcie.

105. BOGACTWO i NIEDOLA, w Jednym akcie.

106. OBIADEK FRANKA, w jednym akcie.

107. PANI KANAPKA, w jednym akcie.

108. WACIO NAUCZYCIELEM, w jednym akcie.

109. ZŁOTA MARYSIA, w jednym akcie.

110. BIAŁOŚNIEŹKA. w jednym akcie.

111. NIE UDAŁO SIĘ, w jednym akcie.

112. PIERWSZA NAGRODA NACI. w jednym akcie.

DALSZE TOMIKI W DRUKU.


WYDAWNICTWO KSIĘGARNI F KORNA
W Warszawie, Marszałkowska 65.


[Uwagi do wydania elektronicznego.

Dokonano następujących poprawek:

strona  tekst   pierwotny   tekst poprawiony uwagi
1       BAŚN    BAŚŃ        'N' zamieniono na 'Ń'.
9       siedż   siedź       'ż' zamieniono na 'ź'.
9       bądż    bądź        'ż' zamieniono na 'ź'.]








End of Project Gutenberg's Kopciuszek, by Jacob Grimm and Wilhelm Grimm

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KOPCIUSZEK ***

***** This file should be named 28044-0.txt or 28044-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/0/4/28044/

Produced by Jimmy O'Regan (Produced from images generously
made available by CBN Polona http://www.polona.pl)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
